filename: vim-tabs-20250609.txt
https://linuxhandbook.com/vim-tabs/

Using Tabbed Interface in Vim

   Give Vim and IDE touch by using tabs to open multiple files. Yes, the same tab experience you have in
   a web browser or a regular text editor.

   Think of Vim tabs like browser tabs for your code editor - each tab holds one or more windows,
   letting you organize multiple files into logical workspaces.

   Unlike window splits that divide your screen, tabs stack contexts you can flip between instantly.
   Three files opened in separate tabs in Vim Three files opened in separate tabs in Vim

   Let's see how you can use tabs in Vim.

Essential Vim tab commands at a glance
   Here are the most common actions you can use while dealing with tabs in Vim.
   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Command                 Action                                Memory Hook
   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   vim -p file1 file2      Opens files in tabs                   Vim in pages
   :tabnew filename        Open file in new tab                  Tab new
   :tabedit filename       Open file for editing in new tab      Tab edit
   gt                      Next tab                              Go to next
   gT                      Previous tab                          Go to previous
   {n}gt                   Jump to tab number n                  Go to specific
   :tabfirst               Jump to first tab                     Self-explanatory
   :tablast                Jump to last tab                      Self-explanatory
   :tabclose               Close current tab                     Self-explanatory
   :tabonly                Close all other tabs                  Keep only this
   :tabs                   List all tabs                         Show tabs
   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   Interesting, right? Let's see it in details.

Opening files in tabs in Vim
   Let's start by opening files in tabs first.

Start Vim with multiple files opened in tabs
   Launch Vim with multiple tabs instantly:
$> vim -p file1.py file2.py file3.py

Open two existing files in tabs while starting Vim
   How can you open just one file in tab? Well... if it's one file, what's the point of tab, right?

   Vim tabs aren't file containers - they're viewport organizers. Each tab can hold multiple split
   windows, making tabs perfect for grouping related files by project, feature, or context. It's like
   having separate desks for different projects.

Open a file in a new tab in the current Vim session
   When you are already inside Vim and want to open a file in a new tab, switch to normal mode by
   pressing Esc key and use the command:
:tabnew filename

   This will load the file in a new tab. If the file doesn't exist, it will create a new one.

   Filename is optional. If you don't provide it, it will open a new file without any name:
:tabnew

Opening existing or new files in tabs from existing Vim session
   If you use tabedit instead of tabnew, it opens the file in Edit mode (insert mode) in the new tab.

Search for files and open them in tabs
   Search the current directory for filename matching the given pattern and open it in a new tab:
:tabf filename*

   This only works if the search results into a single file. If there are more than one file matched, it
   will throw an error:
E77: Too many file names

   While you can open as many tabs as you want, only 10 tabs are shown by default. You can change this
   by setting tabpagemax in your vimrc to something like set tabpagemax=12

Navigating between tabs
   You can move between opened tabs using:
     * :tabn: for next tab
     * :tabp: for previous tab

   Typing the commands could be tedious, so you can use the following key combinations in the nomral
   mode:
     * gt: To go to the next tab
     * gT (i.e. press g and shift and t keys together) To go to the previous tab

   If there are too many tabs opened, you can use:
     * :tabfirst: Jump to first tab
     * :tablast: Jump to last tab

   You can enable mouse mode in Vim and that makes navigating between tabs easier with mouse clicks.

   In many distributions these days, Vim is preconfigured to show the tab labels on the top. If that's
   not the case, add this to your vimrc:
set showtabline=2

   You can list all the opened tabs with:
:tabs

Using :tabs shows all the opened tabs details
   If you are particular about putting the opened tabs in specific order, you can move the current tab
   to Nth position with :tabm N. This tabm is short for tabmove. Note that Vim starts numbering at 0.

Closing tabs
   How do you close a tab? If the tab has a single filed opened, the regular save/exit Vim commands
   work.

   But it will be an issue if you have multiple split windows opened in a tab.
     * :tabclose: Close current tab
     * :tabonly: Only keep the current tab opened, close all others

Tab closing operation in Vim
   Accidentally closed a tab? :tabnew | u creates a new tab and undoes in one motion - your file
   returns.

Bulk tab operations
   With :tabdo command, you can run the same operations in all the tabs.

   For example, :tabdo w will save file changes in all tabs, :tabdo normal! gg=G auto-indents every
   file.

   Similarly, tabdo %s/oldvar/newvar/g executes search-replace across every tab simultaneously. Parallel
   processing for repetitive changes.

   You get the idea. tabdo is the key here.

   You can save your meticulously crafted tab layout. :mksession project.vim then vim -S project.vim
   restores exact tab layout.

Conclusion
   While it is good to enjoy tabs in Vim, don't create dozens of them - they become harder to navigate
   than helpful. Use buffers for file switching and tabs for context switching.

   As you can see, with the tab feature, you get one inch closer to having the IDE like experience in
   Vim.


---

