filename: git_cherry-pick-commit-definitive-guide_20240912.txt
https://linuxbuz.com/devops/cherry-pick-a-commit-in-git-a-definitive-guide

Cherry Pick a Commit in Git - A Definitive Guide
September 11, 2024

   Git is a powerful version control system that helps developers track and manage code changes. One of
   the lesser-known but incredibly useful commands in Git is git cherry-pick. This command allows
   you to select specific commits from one branch and apply them to another. It's like picking cherries;
   you only take what you need! Whether you're working on a feature, fixing a bug, or merging changes,
   git cherry-pick can save you time and effort.

   In this guide, we will show you how to cherry pick a commit in Git.

   Let's dive right in and improve your Git workflow.

What is Git Cherry Pick?
   Git cherry-pick is a command that lets you copy a commit from one branch to another. Unlike merging
   or rebasing, which deal with multiple commits, cherry-picking focuses on individual commits. This
   makes it ideal for situations where you want to apply a specific change without merging an entire
   branch.

   Common Use Cases:
     * Applying a bug fix from a hotfix branch to a development branch.
     * Porting specific features from one branch to another.
     * Reusing commits across multiple branches without merging.

Understanding the Git Cherry Pick Command
   The basic syntax for the git cherry-pick command is simple:
$> git cherry-pick commit-hash

   Here's how it works:
     * You identify the commit you want to cherry-pick by its hash.
     * Then, you run the git cherry-pick command followed by the commit hash.
     * Git applies the changes from that commit to your current branch.

   Example:
   Suppose you want to cherry-pick a commit with the hash a1b2c3d, run:
$> git cherry-pick a1b2c3d

Git Cherry Pick Commit: Step-by-Step Example
   Let's walk through a simple example. Imagine you have a bug fix on a branch called bugfix. You want
   to apply this fix to your main branch.

   1. First, switch to your main branch:
$> git checkout main

   2. Next, find the commit hash of the bug fix in the bugfix branch:
$> git log bugfix

   Look for the commit you want to cherry-pick and note the hash, like d4e5f6g.

   3. Now, cherry-pick the commit:
$> git cherry-pick d4e5f6g

   This will applies the changes to your repository.

Cherry Pick Merge Commit in Git
   Cherry-picking a merge commit can be tricky. Here's how to do it:

   1. Identify the merge commit hash.

   2. Use the -m option to specify the parent you want to use:
$> git cherry-pick -m 1 merge-commit-hash

   3. Resolve any conflicts that arise. Conflicts are common when cherry-picking merge commits.

Cherry Picking in GitHub/GitLab
   GitHub makes cherry-picking easy through its web interface.

   1. Login to your GitHub account and navigate to the pull request containing the commit you want to
   cherry-pick.

   2. Click on the commit to view its details.

   3. Use the "Cherry-pick" option available in GitHub's UI.

   GitHub will apply the commit to the branch you specify.

Git Cherry Pick Without Commit
   Sometimes, you want to apply changes without committing immediately. Use the -no-commit option:
$> git cherry-pick commit-hash --no-commit

   Git will apply the changes but won't create a commit. You can review the changes manually before
   committing them.

   The -no-commit option is useful when you want to cherry-pick changes and include them in a larger
   commit. This will help you to edit the changes before finalizing them.

Conclusion
   The git cherry-pick command is a powerful tool in your Git arsenal. It allows you to select and apply
   specific commits with precision. Whether you're fixing bugs, porting features, or managing changes
   across branches, cherry-picking can help you maintain a clean and efficient workflow. Practice using
   it, and soon it will become a natural part of your Git toolkit.


---

