filename: c_everything-you-need-to-know-about-libraries_20211020.txt
https://medium.com/@meghamohan/everything-you-need-to-know-about-libraries-in-c-e8ad6138cbb4

Everything you need to know about Libraries in C
May 15, 2017·6 min read

   In my last blog post I have discussed about the usage of Static Libraries in C ,when and how to use
   it. If you haven't already read about Static Libraries, check it out: All about Static Libraries
   in C . I have briefly mentioned towards the end about the advantages of Shared Library/Dynamic
   Library over Static Library. As it was a topic that requires a separate blogpost for itself, here we
   are, so let us dive a little deeper about Dynamic Libraries and about its advantages over Static
   Library here.

   So to recap, what is a Library and why and how is it used? And what is Static and Dynamic Library?

     A library is a collection of items that you can call from your program. You can save much time by
     reusing work someone else has already done and be more confident that it has fewer bugs (since
     probably many other people use the libraries too, and you benefit from having them finding and
     fixing bugs). A library is exactly like an executable, except instead of running directly, the
     library functions are invoked with parameters from your executable.

   You would be familiar about the compilation of a C file. If not check out my blogpost here. The
   role of Libraries comes in the final step of compilation which is called 'Linking'. One of the main
   tasks for linker is to make code of library functions (like printf, strlen, etc.) available to your
   program. Let us understand the difference between both Static and Dynamic Library and how it is being
   linked.

Reviewing the Linking of Static Library
   This is the most straight forward way of using a library function linking the object files from the
   library directly into your final executable. Hence the name 'Static', because the library will remain
   unchanged unless the program is recompiled. The final product is a simple executable with no external
   dependencies.

   As a quick refresher, let me list the steps of creating a Static Library below. But if you would like
   to know in full detail about how to create a Static Library, refer to my blogpost .

   Step 1: Compile your Library code(.c files) into an object code
$> gcc -c *.c

   Step 2: Create a Static Library from all ".o" files using command ar
$> ar -rc libholberton.a *.o

   This tells ar to create an archive (option c) and to insert the objects, replacing older files where
   needed (option r)

   Step 3: Next step is to create index for the library using ranlib command. ranlib makes a header in
   the library with the symbols of the object file contents.This helps the compiler to quickly reference
   symbols.

   $> ranlib libholberton.

   Step 4: We have now created a static library libholberton.a. Now let us use the static library by
   invoking it as part of the compilation and linking process when creating a program executable. Incase
   of gcc we use following flags to create static library
gcc main.c -L. -lholberton -o main
     * L : specifies the path to the library .We can use -L. inorder to point to the current directory
       and -L/home/tmp to point to the /home/tmp directory.

   Now run the executable program 'main'
$> ./main

   So here are the advantages of using Static Libraries.
     * Static libraries are not required at runtime, so you do not need to include them when you
       distribute your executable.
     * At compile time, linking to a static library is generally faster than linking to individual
       source files.

   Static linking is very straight forward, but has a number of drawbacks.The two main disadvantages
   are..
     * If the library code is updated (say, to fix a bug) you have to recompile your program into a new
       executable.
     * Every program in the system that uses that library contains a copy in its executable. This is
       very inefficient (and a pain if you find a bug and have to recompile, as per point one).

Reviewing the Linking of Dynamic Library
     Simply put, A shared library/ Dynamic Library is a library that is loaded dynamically at runtime
     for each application that requires it. Dynamic Linking doesn't require the code to be copied, it
     is done by just placing name of the library in the binary file. The actual linking happens when
     the program is run, when both the binary file and the library are in memory.

   Dynamic libraries have advantages and disadvantages as well.
     * They load only a single copy of the library file in memory when you run a program, so a lot of
       memory is saved when you start running multiple programs using that library.
     * The other benefit is that if any update is made to the functions inside a Library, your programs
       don't need to be recompiled ,whereas incase of Static Library you had to recompile or else the
       update wont be reflected. This type of runtime dynamic linking allows for easier library
       maintenance.

   A major disadvantage of Dynamic Library is that they take more time to load and get the program
   running because the linking occurs at runtime instead of during compilation. Since there will be no
   dynamic querying of symbols in static libraries, many softwares still use Static Library for better
   speed.

How to create Dynamic Library
   Now that we know the difference between a Static and Dynamic Library, let us learn in detail about
   how to create a Dynamic Library and make the executable run.

   The steps of compilation of Dynamic Library is almost similar to that of Static Library but with a fe
   extra steps.

   Step 1: Compile all the C files in your current directory using the below command
$> gcc -Wall -Werror -c -fPIC *.c -o dynTest.o

   As you can see, the command is very similar to that of Static Library, extra option here is -fPIC.
   This makes position independent code (PIC), which is a requirement for dynamic library. We first
   compile our c code but do not link them, by giving the -c option. The -Wall and -Werror options are
   just to enable warnings and convert them into errors.

   Step 2: Now we have an object code dynTest.o in our current directory. We need to convert this into a
   dynamic(shared) object file which can be linked with other objects to form an executable. This is
   accomplished using the following command.
$> gcc -shared -o dynLib.so dynTest.o

   The -sharedoption creates a shared object(.so) which can be linked with other objects to form an
   executable.The -ooption allows us to choose the output filename(Here dynLib.so). The .so suffix
   stands for Shared Object, and this is convention for Dynamic Library names.

   Step 3: This creates a Dynamic Library file called dynTest.so in your current directory. Next step is
   for us to understand how to use this Dynamic Library that we have created. Since Dynamic Library is
   linked during runtime, we obviously need to make this file available during runtime. The dynamic
   linker searches standard paths available in the LD_LIBRARY_PATH and also searches in system cache
   (for details explore the command ldconfig) for dynamic libraries. So our next step is to add our
   working directory to the LD_LIBRARY_PATH environment variable so that the linker can find our library
   file. The below command is used for this.
$> export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$LD_LIBRARY_PATH:~/my_path/

   If you do not want to export your current path to LD_LIBRARY_PATH for the dynamic library to work,
   there is another way to make it work. Move the library to /usr/local/lib because '/usr/local/lib' is
   already a path specified in the 'LD_LIBRARY_PATH' environment variable. Now we need to run ldconfig
   on the directory you moved it to. This will add our library to a cache which is searched through when
   a program looks for a shared library:
$> ldconfig /usr/local/lib

   Now we are all set! Our dynamic library is ready for use. We can compile and run our program myfile.c
   now using our dynamic library dynTest.so.
$> gcc -Wall -Werror -o myfile.c dynTest.so



---

