fname: gcc-clang-fPIC-flag-for-shared-or-dinamically-loaded-library-20260727.txt
https://www.reddit.com/r/C_Programming/comments/1hm4wp5/i_have_a_hard_time_grasping_fpic_flag_for_gcc/

PIC - position independent code compiler flag

Position Independent Code means that the generated machine code is not dependent on being located at a
specific address in order to work.

E.g. jumps would be generated as relative rather than absolute.

If your code is compiled with -fPIC, it´s suitable for inclusion in a library - the library must be able to be
relocated from its preferred location in memory to another address, there could be another already loaded
library at the address your library prefers.

To be more specific, the shared library is supposed to be shared between processes, but it may not always be
possible to load the library at the same address in both. If the code were not position independent, then each
process would require its own copy.

You can omit -fPIC when compiling a program or a static library, because only one main program will exist in a
process, so no runtime relocation is ever necessary.

from: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/5311515/gcc-fpic-option

***
Position independent code also enables your OS to turn on better security features by randomizing the location
of the code each time the program is run.

Unless you need fixed-position code for a specific reason, it´s best to generate position independent stuff
every time.

***
Shared libraries can by dynamically loaded using e.g., dlopen().

Shared libraries can be linked to multiple different programs (web browser, spreadsheet, chat program, bitcoin
miner) at the same time. Each of those programs will assign a different location in the process´ address
space, if only because their application-specific code (the main() routine and others) are different sizes, so
the library code that gets "poured in last" just ends up at whatever address is available.

But shared libraries are shared. There is one copy of the code loaded into all of the different program
address spaces. So if your shared library has two functions, fn_a() and fn_b() then those two functions will
have different call addresses. The bitcoin miner may have fn_a() at address 0x3000 and fn_b() at address
0x4000. But the web browser may have fn_a() at address 0x8000 and fn_b() at address 0x9000. (Relative
distances within a single library probably stay the same...)

So if you do the "normal" unshared thing to relocate addresses in a shared library, then when fn_a() tries to
call fn_b(), there is a hard-coded call to 0x4000. But in the web browser, that call should go to 0x9000.
Segmentation fault, core dumped! (Best case. Worst case is subtle corruption from whatever lives at that
address...)

The solution is "position independent" code. Code that will be okay if it is run from address 0x3000 or from
0x8000. For example, if the code is something like call 0x4000 you´re gonna have a bad time. But if the code
is call ip + 0x955, then the branch is relative to whatever the current instruction pointer may be, whether
that is 0x3000 or 0x8000.

***
It changes the code generation so that the object file can be relocated without editing the generated
instructions. Instead instructions are generated to have relative offsets to tables that are in the same
object file, and load addresses from the tables instead of directly encoding the addresses in the
instructions. The dynamic linker can then relocate the object file by editing the tables instead of the
instructions. A shared library created from object files compiled without -fPIC will have text relocations,
which will cause copy-on-write page faults when the instructions are edited.

***
The -fPIC flag is essential for creating Position Independent Code (PIC), particularly when you´re building
shared libraries (.so files). PIC ensures that the code can be loaded at any memory address without
modification, enabling efficient shared library usage. This differs from relocatable files (.o files), which
are generated when you use gcc -c. A relocatable file still contains symbolic references and is not inherently
position-independent - it needs linking to resolve symbols. Without -fPIC, the resulting shared library might
not work correctly on some systems, as absolute memory addresses could lead to runtime errors or
inefficiencies.

To clarify the necessity: position independence is critical for shared libraries because they may be loaded at
arbitrary memory locations by the operating system or the dynamic linker. Static libraries, on the other hand,
are linked into a program at compile time, so they don´t need position-independent code; the linker resolves
all addresses relative to the main program. As for your question on relative vs. absolute addresses, not all
user programs need PIC because the main executable typically has a fixed load address. However, shared
libraries benefit greatly from PIC to allow flexible and efficient memory management in multi-process
environments.


---

