filename: jv_migrating-from-jnlp-java-se-11_20190424.txt
https://opensource.com/article/19/4/migrating-jnlp-java-se-11

What to do when Java SE 11 removes JNLP
10 Apr 2019

When Java SE discontinued JNLP, my organization had to decide the best way to continue delivering a
critical business app. Here's how we got there.

   For about the past 15 years, an organization I work with has used the Java Network Launching
   Protocol (JNLP) to internally distribute a Java Swing desktop application to its users.

   To access the Java Swing application, users had to install a specific version of Java Platform,
   Standard Edition (Java SE) that contained support for JNLP. When they wanted to use the application,
   they would click on the link in the organization's intranet, and the Java Web Start (javaws)
   program would download the XML at the link, interpret it, download the current version of the
   application if necessary, and run it, all while managing the security sandbox where the application
   ran. In other words, it was a nice, low-ceremony way to distribute a completely configured
   application to everyone's desktop.

   However, because JNLP is no longer a part of Java SE (from version 11 onward), the organization
   was faced with a decision: discontinue its use of JNLP as a part of Java SE or eliminate its policy
   of staying reasonably up to date with Java SE releases. This relatively simple-sounding choice turned
   out to be somewhat complex for various reasons.

Option 1: Stay with current Java SE and find a substitute for JNLP
   IcedTea-Web is an open source project that provides JNLP capabilities. This would imply a
   two-step pre-configuration process: 1) install Java SE and 2) install IcedTea-Web, which would
   increase client-side maintenance. Unfortunately, when we were evaluating the options, there was not a
   working IcedTea-Web facility compatible with Java 11, so this would mean using Java 8. However, Java
   SE 8 was reaching end-of-life in March 2019, so we would have to create a Java 8 runtime environment
   from OpenJDK 8 for installation on the client machines and move to a more manual process of
   tracking OpenJDK 8 updates. Neither of these approaches seemed very appealing.

Option 2: Move away from JNLP
   At first, this approach seemed like the worst possible scenario-we would need to modify the
   application to provide configuration information in some other fashion; all the nice automated-update
   stuff in JNLP would be discarded; and we would need some kind of per-workstation installation
   process. Ugh! Or we could rewrite the existing fat client application, liked by its user community,
   as a web app. Double ugh!!!

   All this negativity was surmounted by a few interesting discoveries and a bit of careful thinking:
    1. The configuration information could be packaged as metadata in a metadata table that could be
       selected as a "configuration" by the end user.
    2. The application could fairly easily check its version number against the currently distributed
       version number and refuse to run, or at least complain to any user running an out-of-date
       version.
    3. The application could be packaged along with a customized Java runtime [***1]created with the
       jdeps and jlink commands provided in Open JDK 11, thus ensuring the application always runs with
       the correct version of Java.
    4. The whole installation and execution business could be handled on the client side with Windows
       .cmd files, eliminating the need for an installer (perhaps one day...).
    5. The application and the customized Java runtime distribution could still be handled as a download
       from the intranet.

   With this detail, the attentive reader may be able to guess...

The chosen solution
   In the end, the organization decided to move away from JNLP because the amount of end-user management
   seemed reasonably straightforward compared to maintaining the existing JNLP environment.

   Here is the detailed process for getting to the solution:
    1. Building the application:
         a. The app was always developed and maintained using the NetBeans IDE running in a Linux
            desktop environment; this is still the case, using OpenJDK 11 (from the distro) and NetBeans
            10 (downloaded from the new Apache NetBeans site).
         b. The build process creates an operating system-agnostic dist folder containing the
            application .jar file and all required libraries
    2. Customizing the Java 11 runtime:
         a. Unfortunately, there's no way to customize cross-platform Java runtimes, so we need an
            intermediate Windows computer-let's call it the IWC. (I'm going to come right out and say
            this is the major drawback of our approach.)
         b. OpenJDK 11 prebuilt binaries are installed on the IWC.
         c. The application dist folder is copied to the IWC.
         d. Inside the dist folder, the jdeps command from OpenJDK 11 determines which Java runtime
            components are needed to support the application:
jdeps --print-module-deps TheApplication.jar lib\*
         e. Using the output of the above command, the jlink command (also from OpenJDK 11) builds
            the customized runtime:

            $> jlink --no-header-files --no-man-pages --compress=2 \
            --strip-debug –add-modules \ java.base,java.desktop,java.sql,java.security.jgss,java.xml \
            --output customjre
         f. At this point, the application can be run (tested) from this folder using the command:
.\customjre\bin\java -jar TheApplication.jar
         g. The Install.cmd and RunTheApplication.cmd files are copied into the dist folder.
    3. Bundling the application for distribution:
         a. The dist folder, containing the application, .cmd files and the custom runtime, is zipped
            and put on the intranet server; a link pointing to the .zip file allows users to download
            it.
    4. Downloading, installing, and running the application:
         a. The user navigates to the page containing the link pointing to the .zip file.
         b. Clicking on the link downloads the .zip file.
         c. The user unzips the .zip file, navigates to the dist folder, and double-clicks Install.cmd.
         d. When Install.cmd executes, it copies the dist folder into a known place on the user's
            computer and installs the RunTheApplication.cmd link on the user's desktop.
         e. The user will need to have certain permissions to install the application.
         f. The user does not need Java SE installed on the computer.

   The application was modified to:
     * Read the configuration parameters from a database table (the organization thinks of these as
       "project parameters," so the user is "selecting a project").
     * The VERSION=123 string is extracted from the RELEASE_NOTES.TXT locally and on the server to make
       sure the versions match (and the end user is harassed if they do not).

   That's it. Of course, it's possible to use an installer rather than the .cmd files for a "more
   professional" installation experience. It's also possible to find other ways to install OpenJDK 11 on
   the IWC, which could even be a virtual machine (making it the VIWC). It's too bad the jlink command
   doesn't have a --target-platform option or many other improvements that might be desirable or
   necessary depending on the nature of the deployment environment.

How well does it work?
   Early reports indicate users are happy with the results, and sysadmins are no longer responsible for
   watching over the Java SE version installed. As for the guy supporting the application, he's more or
   less OK with the extra build steps-but would rather deal with two machines than run a VIWC on his
   beautiful System76 laptop.


---
[***1]
https://medium.com/azulsystems/using-jlink-to-build-java-runtimes-for-non-modular-applications-9568c5e70ef4

Using jlink to Build Java Runtimes for non-Modular Applications
Oct 10, 2018

   The most important new feature of JDK 9 was the Java Platform Module System (JPMS) that
   divided the monolithic rt.jar and tools.jar files into 75 distinct modules (at least in the
   OpenJDK, the Oracle JDK contained a few more).

   JDK 9 also eliminated the distinction between the Java Development Kit (JDK) and the Java Runtime
   Environment (JRE). In the past, there was a sub-directory in the JDK (unsurprisingly called jre)
   which only contained things that were required to run a Java application. On Linux, the full JDK 8
   was 364 Mb, the JRE just 197 Mb. Users who were concerned about disk space could install the JRE and
   happily run their applications.

   In JDK 9 and later, the idea is to build Java runtimes that are tailored to the requirements of a
   specific application. Rather than including all 75 modules, you need only include the java.base
   module (which all runtimes must include by definition) as well as any other modules the application
   references. All transitive module dependencies must also be included. JDK 9 and later provides the
   jlink command to assemble and optimize a set of modules and their dependencies into a custom
   runtime image.

   Many people, when moving an application from JDK 8 or earlier to JDK 11, do not want to have to take
   on the additional work of migrating application code to use modules. Fortunately, application code
   and external libraries can all be left on the classpath and treated as part of the unnamed module.
   For simple applications, you can use the same command to start the application as before.

   However, the assumption is that, because jlink only works with modules that it can't be used to
   generate a runtime image for non-module based applications.

   This article will take you through the steps necessary to build significantly smaller Java runtimes
   for applications that have not been converted to use modules. In addition, since JavaFX has been
   removed from the Oracle JDK (and was never part of OpenJDK binaries), we'll include that in our
   application to demonstrate another part of using this tool.

   The application we'll be using is a simple data-entry application that presents a form to the user
   and then stores the fields into a MySQL database. How the application works is immaterial to this
   post so I won't bother sharing the code.

   The application was built using NetBeans, which generates a dist directory that contains all the
   compiled code required to run the application. Since the application uses some libraries the layout
   looks like this:
   
   dist/
      +-- FlightRecorder.jar
      +-- lib/
            +-- NomisUtil.jar
            +-- TravelDatabase.jar
            +-- mysql-connector-java-5.1.23-bin.jar
   
or (same):
   
    [dist]-+-- FlightRecorder.jar
           |
           +-- [lib]-+-- NomisUtil.jar
                     |
                     +-- TravelDatabase.jar
                     |
                     +-- mysql-connector-java-5.1.23-bin.jar

   
   
Using JavaFX with JDK 11
   To run the application on JDK 8, all that was required was
$> java -jar FlightRecorder.jar

   If we run this application with JDK 9, we need to make no changes.

   However, if we try this with JDK 11, we get the following error message:
Error: Could not find or load main class flightrecorder.Main
Caused by: java.lang.NoClassDefFoundError: javafx/application/Application

   As I mentioned earlier, this is because neither the Oracle JDK nor OpenJDK binaries include JavaFX.
   Luckily, the nice people at Gluon provide free builds of the OpenJFX project, so it's easy to
   resolve this issue.

   To start, we need to download the [https://gluonhq.com/products/javafx/]JavaFX SDK and unzip it into a
   directory on our machine. For simplicity, we'll put it in /opt. Next, we need a couple of extra command
   line flags:
$> java --module-path /opt/javafx-sdk-11/lib --add-modules=javafx.controls -jar FlightRecorder.jar

   The two extra flags are:
    1. --module-path: Equivalent of the classpath, telling the JVM where to search for modules.
    2. --add-modules: This specifies additional root modules to resolve. Because all the application
       code is on the classpath, we don't have an initial module, so this option is required. We can
       specify this in two ways, either with an explicit list of modules as above, or we could indicate
       that everything on the module path is to be included by using the parameter ALL-MODULE-PATH.

   We now have an application that runs on JDK 11 using external JavaFX modules but with all application
   code still on the classpath.

Building a Java Runtime
   In order to use jlink in this situation, we need to generate a list of the JDK modules that the
   application uses. To do this, we can use the jdeps command that also comes with the JDK.

   Interestingly, if we use the JDK 9 version of jdeps on the application we get this result:
$> jdeps --list-deps FlightRecorder.jar
java.base
java.logging
java.sql
javafx.base
javafx.controls
javafx.graphics
not found
unnamed module: FlightRecorder.jar

   Most of this is fine but the 'not found' message is confusing and not very useful (what was not
   found?) Thankfully, jdeps was improved in JDK 10 so if we use the JDK 11 version we get the
   following:
$> jdeps --list-deps FlightRecorder.jar
java.base
java.logging
java.sql

   Although this tells us which modules are used by the application, we're missing some information.
   Remember, we're providing the JavaFX modules separately so we need to analyse any JDK module
   dependencies they might have. The solution is to include the module details in the same way we did
   for the Java launcher:
$> jdeps --module-path /opt/javafx-sdk-11/lib --add-modules=javafx.controls --list-deps FlightRecorder.jar
JDK removed internal API/com.sun.media.jfxmediaimpl.platform.ios
java.base
java.datatransfer
java.desktop/java.awt.dnd.peer
java.desktop/sun.awt
java.desktop/sun.awt.dnd
java.desktop/sun.swing
java.logging
java.scripting
java.sql
java.xml
jdk.jsobject
jdk.unsupported
jdk.unsupported.desktop
jdk.xml.dom

   I find this output a bit odd, as it includes more than just the module dependencies (which is what we
   asked for). In the case of (only) the java.desktop module we also get some extra information about
   the packages used. I also find the first message about the JDK removed internal somewhat confusing.

   In theory, if we want an output that can be used directly in jlink, we can use the --print-module-deps
   flag instead of --list-dependencies. However, when I tried this on both MacOS X and Linux, I got a
   NullPointerException. Having posted a Tweet about this it has been submitted as a bug and will
   hopefully be fixed soon (although it's a P3 so it may be a while).

   Now we are ready to use jlink to produce a runtime for the application.
$> jlink --no-header-files --no-man-pages --compress=2 --strip-debug --add-modules java.datatransfer,\
java.desktop,java.logging,java.scripting,java.sql,java.xml,jdk.jsobject,jdk.unsupported,\
jdk.unsupported.desktop,jdk.xml.dom --output java-runtime

   To keep the size of the runtime as small as possible, we use command line flags to suppress the
   inclusion of header files and man pages as well as stripping the debug information and compressing to
   zip file format where relevant. The list of modules to include is the one generated by jdeps.

   At this point, you would be forgiven for thinking that we can now run the application using our jlink
   generated runtime. However, if we try this here is the output:
$> java-runtime/bin/java --module-path /opt/javafx-sdk-11/lib --add-modules=javafx.controls -jar FlightRecorder.jar
SEVERE: Error connecting to database
SEVERE: java.lang.NoClassDefFoundError: javax/naming/RefAddr

   This is because the application uses a MySQL JDBC driver packaged in the
   lib/mysql-connector-java-5.1.23-bin.jar file. Because this (and the two other jar files in the lib
   directory) are accessed via the classpath, they are not automatically analysed by jdeps. The jdeps
   command does allow you to specify a classpath via the -cp flag. Unfortunately, jdeps does not appear
   to use this to reference jar files that are required by the application. It is, therefore, necessary
   to make sure that all jar files used by the application are passed as arguments:
$> jdeps --module-path /opt/javafx-sdk-11/lib --add-modules=javafx.controls --list-deps FlightRecorder.jar lib/*
JDK removed internal API/com.sun.media.jfxmediaimpl.platform.ios
java.base
java.datatransfer
java.desktop/java.awt.dnd.peer
java.desktop/sun.awt
java.desktop/sun.awt.dnd
java.desktop/sun.swing
java.logging
java.management
java.naming
java.rmi
java.scripting
java.sql
java.transaction.xa
java.xml
jdk.jsobject
jdk.unsupported
jdk.unsupported.desktop
jdk.xml.dom

   As you can see, we need to include a few more modules in our runtime. The command for jlink becomes:
$> jlink --no-header-files --no-man-pages --add-modules java.datatransfer,java.desktop,java.logging,\
java.management,java.naming,java.rmi,java.scripting,java.sql,java.transaction.xa,java.xml,jdk.jsobject,\
jdk.unsupported,jdk.unsupported.desktop,jdk.xml.dom --output java-runtime

   The application now runs without any problems using the generated runtime. On my Mac, the
   java-runtime directory is a very respectable 39Mb, compared to 286Mb for the full JDK.

   To simplify redistribution, we can copy the dist directory with the application jar files into the
   java-runtime directory, create a simple script to execute Java with all the appropriate command line
   flags and we are all good to go.


---
