filename: apt-vs-apt-get-20260326.txt
https://linuxize.com/post/apt-vs-apt-get/

apt vs apt-get: What Is the Difference?
Mar 23, 2026

apt vs apt-get comparison
Both apt and apt-get manage packages on Debian-based systems. They talk to the same package database,
resolve the same dependencies, and pull from the same repositories. Yet they exist as separate tools,
and choosing the wrong one in the wrong context can cause minor headaches.

This guide explains how apt and apt-get differ, when to use each one, and how their commands map to
each other.

Why Two Tools Exist
apt-get has been the standard Debian package manager since 1998. It is reliable and well-documented,
but its interface was designed for an era when terminal usability was an afterthought. Related tasks
like searching and showing package details live in a separate tool called apt-cache, so users constantly
switch between the two.

The apt command was introduced in Debian 8 and Ubuntu 14.04 (APT version 1.0, released in 2014) as a
user-friendly front end. It combines the most common apt-get and apt-cache operations into a single
command, adds a progress bar, and uses colored output by default.

Both tools are part of the same apt package and share the same underlying libraries. Installing one
always installs the other.

User-Facing Differences
When you run apt install in a terminal, you will notice a few things that apt-get does not do:
  - A progress bar at the bottom of the screen shows overall download and install progress.
  - Newly installed packages are highlighted in the output.
  - The number of upgradable packages is shown after apt update finishes.
  - Output is formatted with color when connected to a terminal.

These features make apt more pleasant for interactive use. They also make its output less predictable for
scripts, since the formatting can change between APT versions without warning. The apt man page states
this explicitly: the command line interface of apt "may change between versions" and "should not
be used in scripts."

apt-get, on the other hand, guarantees a stable output format. Its behavior and exit codes are consistent
across versions, which is why automation tools like Ansible, Docker, and CI pipelines use apt-get rather
than apt.

Command Comparison
The table below maps the most common apt commands to their apt-get or apt-cache equivalents:

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Task                                 apt                       apt-get / apt-cache
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Update package index                 apt update                apt-get update
Upgrade all packages                 apt upgrade               apt-get upgrade
Full upgrade (may remove packages)   apt full-upgrade          apt-get dist-upgrade
Install a package                    apt install               pkg apt-get install pkg
Remove a package                     apt remove pkg            apt-get remove pkg
Remove with config files             apt purge pkg             apt-get purge pkg
Remove unused dependencies           apt autoremove            apt-get autoremove
Search for a package                 apt search keyword        apt-cache search keyword
Show package details                 apt show pkg              apt-cache show pkg
List installed packages              apt list --installed      dpkg --list
List upgradable packages             apt list --upgradable     (no direct equivalent)
Edit sources list                    apt edit-sources          (manual file editing)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As you can see, apt merges apt-get and apt-cache into one tool and adds a few convenience commands like
apt list and apt edit-sources that have no direct apt-get equivalent.
When to Use apt

Use apt for everyday interactive work in the terminal. If you are installing a package, checking for
updates, or searching the repository by hand, apt is the better choice. The progress bar and cleaner
output make it easier to follow what is happening.

For example, to update your package index and upgrade all packages:
$> sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade

To search for a package and then install it:
$> apt search nginx
$> sudo apt install nginx

When to Use apt-get
Use apt-get in shell scripts, Dockerfiles, CI pipelines, and any automated workflow. The stable output
format means your scripts will not break when the system upgrades to a newer APT version.

A typical Dockerfile uses apt-get with the -y flag to skip confirmation prompts:

dockerfile

RUN apt-get update && apt-get install -y \
	curl \
	git \
	&& rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/*

The same applies to Bash scripts[https://linuxize.com/post/run-bash-script/] and configuration management
tools. If the command runs without a human watching the output, use apt-get.

Advanced Operations
The commands below work with both apt and apt-get, but they are better documented and more established
under apt-get. In scripts and Dockerfiles, prefer the apt-get form for consistency and stability.

  * apt-get install --no-install-recommends pkg - Install a package without pulling in recommended (but not
    required) dependencies. This is widely used in Docker images to keep the image size small.
  * apt-get install --allow-downgrades pkg - Allow installing an older version of a package.
  * apt-get build-dep pkg - Install all build dependencies needed to compile a package from source.
  * apt-get source pkg - Download the source package.
  * apt-get download pkg - Download the .deb file without installing it.
  * apt-get changelog pkg - Display the package changelog.
  * apt-get clean / apt-get autoclean - Clear the local package cache.

FAQ
Is apt-get deprecated? No. apt-get is actively maintained and receives updates alongside apt. The APT
developers have stated that apt-get will not be removed. It remains the recommended tool for scripts
and automation.

Can I replace all apt-get commands with apt? For interactive terminal use, yes. For scripts, no. The apt
output format is not guaranteed to remain stable, and its interface may change between versions. Stick
with apt-get in any automated workflow.

Is there a performance difference between apt and apt-get? No. Both tools use the same libraries and
resolve dependencies the same way. The only difference is the user interface. Install and download speeds
are identical.

What about apt-cache? Is it still needed? For interactive use, apt search and apt show replace the most
common apt-cache operations. For scripts or when you need advanced query options like apt-cache policy
or apt-cache depends, you should still use apt-cache directly.

Conclusion
Use apt when you are typing commands at a terminal, and apt-get when you are writing scripts or Dockerfiles.
For a complete reference of apt subcommands, see the [https://linuxize.com/post/how-to-use-apt-command/]apt
Command in Linux guide and the [https://linuxize.com/cheatsheet/apt/]APT cheatsheet.


---

