filename: apt_simplify-command-line-package-management_20151202.txt
http://www.howtogeek.com/234583/simplify-command-line-package-management-with-apt-instead-of-apt-get/

Simplify Command-Line Package Management with APT instead of apt-get
apt-instead-apt-get-main

APT, the Advanced Package Tool from the Debian project, is for managing packages by using a lot of separate
tools to accomplish various tasks. In the past, users needed to know multiple command structures like
apt-get, apt-cache, apt-config, and many more to utilize the full feature-set of APT.

APT was created originally to solve a lot of package management problems like putting an end to
the dependency hell that so many people experienced in the early days of Linux-based operating
systems. Unfortunately, APT suffers from a different kind of hell, something I call “Dispersed
Documentation Hell” (DDH). The documentation related to APT is scattered in various different tools
and in some cases, such as the main apt command, practically impossible to find.

For over a decade, practically all tutorials and guides for installing and removing packages on a
Debian/Ubuntu based system have been suggesting apt-get to users. In the past, that was the correct
suggestion because “apt” as a command hadn’t existed at the time but due to the Dispersed
Documentation Hell a lot of people aren’t aware that now it does exists.

If you wanted to install a package almost all guides will suggest:

sudo apt-get install package

but now instead you can simplify that with

sudo apt install package

Some may argue that “apt” isn’t much different than “apt-get” and that is true but I think
the hyphen in the command is what creates a bottleneck for many users due to its awkwardness. Using apt
instead will save time and save the amount of keystrokes required to accomplish the same task.

Dispersed Documentation Hell (DDH)
apt-instead-apt-get-documentation-hell

The fundamental problem with the documentation regarding APT is that depending on where you look and
how you look, you may or may not find anything at all. If you were to search Google, or DuckDuckGo,
for “apt documentation” you’d find one of three types of results:

apt-get related documentation
Basic overview information regarding APT
Completely unrelated information
If you were to throw “linux”, “ubuntu”, or even “debian” into the search query the types
of results you’ll receive won’t change. The DDH is so severe that you’ll find documentation from
Debian.org marked as Obsolete Documentation before you’ll find anything useful related to the “apt”
command, if you ever find it at all.

Man Pages
Man Pages are documentation pages that can be used locally on your system or via online directories. Local
entries may or may not be up to date depending on the version of your distro. For example, Ubuntu 15.10
has the latest man page but 14.04 does not by default. However, if you keep your 14.04 version of Ubuntu
up to date with service packs then you should have the updated man page. You can check to see if you
have the latest version of the man page with the command below.

man apt

On the other hand, if you were to search for the man page online then you will almost always find the
old overview man page. If you were to keep digging, though, you may uncover the Ubuntu 15.10 man page
which is up to date or instead you may uncover the online 14.04 man page which is out of date.

Simplify the Command-Line with APT
The list below contains the most useful options available via the apt command and what old commands
they simplify.

apt install package(s)
replaces apt-get install package
apt remove package(s)
replaces apt-get remove package
apt search query
replaces apt-cache search query
apt show package(s)
replaces apt-cache show package(s)
apt update
replaces apt-get update
apt upgrade
replaces apt-get upgrade
apt list –installed
replaces dpkg –get-selections | grep -v deinstall
replaces dpkg -l
apt list –upgradable (sudo not required)
replaces apt-get -u upgrade –assume-no” (sudo required)
apt edit-sources
replaces echo ‘new line of text’ | sudo tee -a /etc/apt/sources.list
replaces sudo nano /etc/apt/sources.list
Linux Mint is Enhancing Simplicity
apt-instead-apt-get-linux-mint

Most of the recent operating systems based on Debian or Ubuntu have the up to date version of APT that
allows for some tasks to be simplified but the Linux Mint team decided that APT should be simplified quite
a few years ago. Linux Mint created a python script (started in 2009) to make APT as useful and as simple
as possible. I hope that Debian sees the benefit of expanding the functionality of apt so that in the
future everyone can benefit from the simplified approach that Mint is taking. The apt command can be so
much better than it is right now and hopefully Debian sees this as well and brings apt to its full potential.

Linux Mint decided to make an interesting choice in their script by removing the need to use sudo. For
example, if you run “apt install package” it will automatically apply sudo to the front of it during
processing so the user doesn’t need to remember if something needs sudo or not, the script will apply
it or not accordingly.

The list below contains the most useful additional options available via the Linux Mint apt command and
what old commands they simplify. Note: the following list only applies to Linux Mint users at the moment.

apt autoclean
replaces apt-get autoclean
apt autoremove
replaces apt-get autoremove
apt purge package(s)
replaces apt-get remove –purge package(s)
apt depends package(s)
replaces apt-cache depends package(s)
apt rdepends package(s)
replaces apt-rdepends package(s)
apt policy package(s)
replaces apt-cache policy package(s)
apt held
replaces dpkg –get-selections | grep hold
apt hold package
replaces echo package hold | sudo dpkg –set-selections
apt unhold package
replaces echo package install | sudo dpkg –set-selections
apt download package (downloads the deb file of a package)
replaces LC_ALL=C apt-cache depends package |grep -v “Conflicts:\|Replaces:”|awk ‘{print $NF}’|sed
-e ‘s/[<>]//g’|xargs aptitude download -r
APT: Do More with Much Less
The apt command has simplified a lot of tasks with command-line package management on the Linux
(Debian-based) desktop and with Linux Mint taking the initiative to improve it further, hopefully it
will help the community transition to the new method. The only command that I noticed Linux Mint’s apt
script missing thus far is “apt add-repository” to replace the awkward add-apt-repository command,
so I wrote a patch to add this feature to the script. I’m pleased to inform you that they have accepted
my patch so this feature will be available in a future release of Linux Mint.
