filename: automount-ugreen-nas-20260320.txt
https://www.howtogeek.com/how-a-single-linux-command-made-my-ugreen-nas-the-center-of-my-homelab/

How a single Linux command unlocked my Ugreen NAS to become the center of my homelab
Mar 17, 2026

   I wanted to use my Ugreen NAS as a central hub for my homelab-but that required mounting external
   storage servers to it. For some reason, Ugreen doesn´t let you do this within the operating system,
   but I found a way around it with just one command.

Why would I want to mount a storage server to my storage server?

I´m complicated, okay?
   A rack-mount server slid out of the rack slightly with other servers above and below it.

   While a NAS is the main place most people will store files, there´s also many reasons to mount
   other file storage to a NAS remotely. In my case, I have multiple NAS servers that each serve a
   different purpose.

   When my new Ugreen NAS arrived, I knew right away I would make it my Plex server-but not for
   storage. You see, I have a 12-bay rack-mount storage server that acts as my bulk storage system
   where the majority of my large hard drives live. It has 80TB of usable storage in it (95TB if you
   count the parity drive and SSD cache drives).

   My Ugreen NAS, however, only has six drive bays, not 12, so I wouldn´t be moving my actual Plex
   storage to the Ugreen. What I would be moving is the Plex container itself, because the Ugreen NAS
   has a Core Ultra 7 processor and 64GB of LPDDR5x RAM, making it a behemoth when it comes to
   transcoding and general media server tasks.

   I´ve used this system for years though, running my Plex server separate from my storage. It´s
   normally easy to do, just mount the storage server on the Plex server through either NFS or SMB,
   and you´re ready to go. Sadly, with a Ugreen NAS, it´s not quite that simple.

Ugreen doesn´t let you natively mount SMB or NFS shares to their NAS system
You can share NFS or SMB, but not mount... for some reason

   I spent a good hour or two trying to figure out how to mount a SMB or NFS share on my Ugreen NAS with
   UGOS Pro installed on it. Sure, I could have replaced the operating system, but I wanted to use the
   NAS as it ships.

   Within UGOS Pro, there are settings for both NFS and SMB in the settings area as well as the files
   app. Normally, one of those two locations is where you mount a remote NFS or SMB share-but UGOS makes
   it so you can only share via SMB or NFS, not mount.

   This is pretty frustrating, and something that I´ve seen others complain about online for quite a
   while, but Ugreen simply hasn´t fixed it yet. Maybe they never will.

   So, since I couldn´t mount my NFS share natively within UGOS, I had to resort to another method-SSH.

It´s easier then you think to mount a NFS share on Ugreen-you just need a terminal

The great problem solver
   Within the terminal, you can easily mount a NFS or SMB share to the Ugreen NAS through the fstab.
   Before I went too far, I tested mounting my server with just a command, instead of editing the fstab.
$> sudo mkdir -p /mnt/server
$> sudo mount -t nfs <nfs-ip>:/path/to/share /mnt/server

   What this does is makes a directory in /mnt for the server, and then mounts your NFS share to that
   folder. Once this worked, I went on to actually edit the fstab file in /etc/fstab, adding the
   following line:
<nfs-ip>:/path/to/share /mnt/server nfs defaults,_netdev 0 0

   The key here is the '_netdev' flag, which tells fstab to wait until the network is up before trying to
   mount the NFS share. If fstab tried to mount the share before it was properly networked, then it
   would just error out and it might not actually mount it.


---

