filename: find-mac-address_20220817.txt
https://itsfoss.com/find-mac-address-linux/

How to Find Your MAC address in Ubuntu and Other Linux Distros
August 14, 2022

   When you are learning networking or troubleshooting it, you would need to know the MAC address.

   A computer can have more than one MAC address. It is because the MAC address is a core part of
   networking, and each networking peripheral device has its own MAC address.

   So, your WiFi card has a MAC address, and so does the Ethernet (LAN) port. Even the Bluetooth has
   one.

   The MAC address, also known as the physical address, is a 12-digit hexadecimal code (48-bits) and is
   represented as MM:MM:MM:SS:SS:SS

   In this tutorial, I'll share the steps for finding the MAC address of your desired networking
   interface in Linux. I'll show both command line and GUI methods.

Method 1: Find MAC address using command line
   There are serveral Linux networking commands[https://itsfoss.com/basic-linux-networking-commands/]
   [basic-linux-networking-commands_20220817.txt]that can be used to get the MAC address of the WiFi
   or LAN cards.

   Basically, use the same command that you use for checking the IP address.

   Open up your terminal and use the following command, and it will bring the address of the present
   network cards in your system:
$> ip link

   And you'll be met with the following output:
   use ip link command to show mac address use ip link command to show mac address

   Generally, the wireless device names will be wlan0, wlan1, wlan2, wlo0, wlo1, and wlo2, whereas the
   Ethernet (wired device) will probably have eth0, eth1, eno0, eno1,enpls0, or enpls1.

   You can find the MAC address of each device at the last line of the device description, followed by
   link/ether and it's 52:54:00:5c:92:bf in my case.

Get the MAC address of Bluetooth
   As I mentioned earlier, all networking devices have a physical address. If you want to see the MAC
   address of your Bluetooth adapter, you can use this command:
$> hciconfig

   You can see it beside the BD Address field.
abhishek@itsfoss:~$ hciconfig
hci0:   Type: Primary  Bus: USB
        BD Address: DC:41:A9:FB:7A:C4  ACL MTU: 1021:4  SCO MTU: 96:6
        UP RUNNING
        RX bytes:17895787 acl:275 sco:250783 events:298882 errors:0
        TX bytes:303664302 acl:295384 sco:249895 commands:3380 errors:0

   You can also use the bluetoothctl command here.

Method 2: Get MAC address using GUI
   If you're afraid of using the terminal you can use the network settings to get the MAC address
   details.

   I am using Ubuntu with the GNOME desktop environment. If you use some other desktop environments, the
   screenshots may not look the same.

   First, search for settings in the system menu and open the first result.
   search for settings in system menu search for settings in system menu

   Now, for the left menu bar, select Network and click on the little gear icon located near to wired
   network toggle. Even if you're not connected to a wired network, you can still follow the same
   approach.
   select networks and click on gear icon select networks and click on gear icon

   If you're on Wi-Fi, there will be an option for Wi-Fi in the left menu bar. From there, you have to
   follow the same approach (clicking on the gear icon) to get your MAC address.

   Once you click on the gear icon, you'll be met with details of the selected network interface. Here,
   the MAC address is given as the Hardware address.
   find mac address using gui find mac address using gui

   Here you have it in the easiest way possible!

Final Words
   Did you know that the first half of hexadecimal code (24 bits) is used to represent the
   manufacturer of your network adapter?

   Finding a MAC address in Linux is quite easy as you have seen it here. On the same note, you may like
   to learn about changing the MAC address in Linux.



---

