filename: fix-ubuntu-slow-shutdowns-snap-daemon_20230329.txt
https://www.omgubuntu.co.uk/2023/03/fix-ubuntu-slow-shutdowns-snap-daemon

   It's not the end of the world but if it was I'd be 90s seconds late to it...

Slow Ubuntu Shutdowns Because of Snap Daemon? Here's a Fix

   It's not the end of the world but if it was I'd be 90s seconds late to it...
   Sometimes I shutdown Ubuntu and ...it takes ages to actually power off.

   Am I alone?
   Am I unreasonable?

   I'm not sure, but I am highly caffeinated - massive props to all the wonderful folks who buy me a
   coffee (it really does get spent on coffee) ☕️ - and I haven't written anything for about 5 days.

   Which is almost as long as my shutdowns seem to take...

Slow Ubuntu Shutdowns Are Real
   When I hit shutdown (or run sudo shutdown now from a terminal) I expect Ubuntu to do its "going...
   going... gone" process in 5-10 seconds, max. I want to hit shutdown, be able to close my laptop's lid,
   stuff it in my bag, and go buy bread. And, to be fair, most of the time Ubuntu does do that.

   But sometimes it doesn't. Sometimes it hangs. For ages.

   Those loading dots on the shutdown screen just keep... dotting. And I find it highly irritating!

   As any Linux geek would, I can hit esc to see what's happening behind the scenes and almost always
   the message glaring back at me reads:
A stop job is running for Snap Daemon (57s / 1min 30)

   That's a timer on the end. Yeah, I don't just get to enjoy a slow shutdown, I get to "enjoy" watching
   the counter tick up, one excruciating second at a time, unable to intervene until, at last, the
   maximum allowed time is reached and-BLINK-my computer finishes shutting down.

   Ubuntu gives the Snap Daemon 90 seconds to stop and, if by that time it doesn't... 💀.

   Obviously having to (occasionally) wait an extra 1 minute 30 seconds for a
   shutdown to complete is not a major issue (well, unless you're a mayfly). But it is considerably
   longer than a shutdown should take, and indeed long than a shutdown does take on other Linux
   distributions.

   Irked from encountering this issue yet again, I went in search of a "fix".

Fix Slow Shutdowns Due to Snap Daemon
   Disclaimer: I am not a snap doctor. I do not know why the snap daemon often refuses to gracefully
   stop when asked. I do not know how to fix the underlying cause merely treat the symptom.

   A nuclear solution is to run sudo apt purge snapd, put on some sunglasses, and head off into a
   glorious Hollywood sunset.

   However, l don't harbour an ideological allergy to the Snap format, and a number of my favourite
   command line tools are installed as snaps (honest lol). Plus, y'know, I write about Ubuntu and
   Snaps are kinda core to the quote Ubuntu experience unquote these days.

   But I am done enduring recurrent bouts of WHY IS NOTHING HAPPENING-ness.

   That 1 minute 30 seconds I wait for the Snap Daemon to meet its (inevitable) end would be better
   spent propelling my skinny frame to the nearest artisan bakery, or letting the cat in with DEAR GOD
   WHAT IS THAT IN YOUR MOUTH SWEET, PRINCESS....

   So I reduced the snap daemon timeout from 90 seconds to (still rather patient) 30 seconds - winning
   back myself an entire minute.

   Want to do it to?
    1. Open a new terminal window
    2. Edit /etc/systemd/system.conf (as root) in your fave editor
    3. Find the line: #DefaultTimeoutStopSec=90s
    4. Remove the # (if present) from the start of the line
    5. Change =90s to your desired value, e.g., =30s
    6. Save your changes
    7. Double check you hit save

   Now, next time your system restarts - and I pray the shutdown is swift - the new timeout value will
   get picked up by the systemd deamon and, all is well. If you don't want to reboot I think you can run
   systemctl daemon-reload instead, but I didn't do that so you're on own if it makes things go funky.

   Anyway, that's it.
   Obviously this guide is not an official workaround that I'm paraphrasing from snap documentation.
   Heck, there could be a very good reason why the timeout is as long as it is, and a very good reason
   why we ought to put up with waiting for the blasted thing to die but...



---

