filename: howto_hack-ubuntu-password_20250120.txt
https://itsfoss.com/how-to-hack-ubuntu-password/

How to Reset Forgotten Ubuntu Password in 2 Minutes
13 Nov 2024

   If you forgot your user password on Ubuntu, don't worry. You can reset an Ubuntu password very
   easily. This guide explains an easy method for changing the root password on Ubuntu. The method
   should also be applicable to other Linux distributions.

   Forgot your Ubuntu login password? It happens.

   If you haven't used Ubuntu for some time, it's only natural to not remember the password. The good
   news is that you don't need to reinstall the entire operating system because of it. You can recover
   Ubuntu passwords easily.

   The method mentioned here works for resetting an Ubuntu password in VMware, dual boot or single
   install. All you need is a little bit of patience and to run a couple of commands. You'll reset the
   root password within minutes.

   Using Linux on WSL? It's a bit different for WSL. You may follow the steps for resetting Linux
   password in WSL here.
   Forgot Linux Password on WSL? Here's How to Reset it Easily
   Forgot the password of your Linux distribution app you installed in Windows via WSL? No worries. You
   can easily reset the Linux password in WSL.
   It's FOSSAbhishek Prakash

Reset Ubuntu password from recovery mode

Step 1: Boot into recovery mode
   Switch the computer on. Go to the grub menu. Generally, it appears automatically - if not, then hold
   down the shift key or press Esc key until the boot menu appears.

   If you're using Oracle VirtualBox or VMware, you have to hold down the shift key when the logo of
   Oracle or VMware appears.

   In the grub menu, select the "Advanced Options for Ubuntu":
   Advanced boot options in Grub menu of Ubuntu This is grub screen

   In here, you'll see the option to go to recovery mode:
   Boot into recovery mode

   It will bring you to a black screen with several lines of output being displayed in a flash. Wait for
   a few seconds here.

Step 2: Drop to root shell prompt
   Now you'll be presented with different options for recovery mode. Here you need to choose "Root -
   Drop to root shell prompt". Just press the enter key to select this option.

   You'll see that when you select the root shell prompt option, an option to enter commands appears at
   the bottom. This is your root shell prompt and this is where you'll use the commands to reset the
   password.

   In Linux/UNIX, when you have to enter the password after using passwd command, nothing is reflected
   on the screen. If this is your first time, you'll think probably your system has frozen up because
   you are typing the new password and nothing is shown on the screen. This is normal security feature
   coming from older UNIX days. Type the password and press enter. You'll be asked to confirm the
   password. Repeat the process of 'blindly' typing the password.

Step 3: Remount the root with write access
   You need to have write access to the root partition. By default, it has read-only access.

   Use the command below to remount it with write access:
#> mount -rw -o remount /

Step 4: Reset username or password
   Here, you'll be given root access. Use the following command to list all the users available:
#> ls /home

   Based on this command, choose the "username" for which you want to reset or (say) hack the password.
   Now, use the following command to reset the password for the selected "username":
#> passwd username

   It prompts for a new password. Enter the new password twice.

   Do note that nothing is displayed on the screen when you start typing the password. This is perfectly
   normal and actually a security feature in Linux systems. Just blindly type the password and press
   enter.
Enter new UNIX password:
Retype new UNIX password:

   Voilà! There you go. You have just successfully reset the password. Now exit the root shell prompt:
exit

   When you exit, you'll be back at the recovery mode menu. Select the normal boot option here.

   There will be a warning about graphics mode compatibility. Don't worry. A complete reboot will fix
   any issues with this.

   You should now be able to log in with the new password.

Possible Troubleshoot:
   While entering the new password you might be prompted with Authentication token manipulation error
   like this:
passwd username
Enter new UNIX password:
Retype new UNIX password:
passwd: Authentication token manipulation error
passwd: password unchanged

   The reason for this error is that the file system is mounted with read access only. Change the access
   and remount the file system in the following manner:
#> mount -rw -o remount /

   Now try to reset the password again. It should work now.

   As you can see, it is extremely easy to change Ubuntu password even if you've forgotten it. It
   will barely take a few minutes.

Alternate method to reset Ubuntu password
   If, for some reason, you have difficulty dropping to the root shell and changing the password, you
   can try these steps.

Step 1
   Reboot your computer. Hold shift to bring up the grub screen (if it doesn't appear automatically).
   Press E at the grub prompt to edit the grub screen.

Step 2
   Find the line starting with linux, change the ro to rw and append init=/bin/bash at the end of that
   line.

Step 3
   Press ctrl-x to save your changes and boot.

   Now you are booting into the Linux kernel with read and write permissions, and instead of going to a
   graphical user interface, you'll use the bash shell.

   In other words, your system will boot up to a passwordless root shell.

Step 4
   Type in the passwd command with your username. If you don't know the username, check with ls
   /home command (as mentioned in method 1).

   Set your new password.

   Once you've set the new password, exit the terminal. Just type reboot in the terminal or use the
   shutdown command.
#> shutdown -r now

   Your password should be changed now.

If resetting Ubuntu passwords is this easy, isn't this a security risk?
   That's a fair question. One of the main advantages of Linux over Windows is its security. But if
   "anyone" can reset the password, how come Ubuntu or other Linux distributions can be considered
   secure?

   Let me explain a few things here. The main security risk is if someone hacks into your account from a
   remote location via the internet. That's not happening here.

   If anyone has physical access to your computer, the data in your computer is already at risk. Unless
   the entire disk is encrypted, anyone can "steal" your data using a live USB without even entering
   your installed operating system.

   By default, Ubuntu doesn't have a root password and the root account is locked. The user account
   you set up while installing Ubuntu is included as an admin with sudo rights. But that doesn't mean
   that you are root.

   This lack of root password is a deliberate feature The "advanced options for Ubuntu" in the boot menu
   allow you to perform some specific root-related tasks from the "root shell prompt". This is why
   you're able to reset the Ubuntu password through this method.

   If you want to make your system more secure, you can either encrypt the disk (to save your data) or
   setup a password for root user in Ubuntu.

Bonus Tip: Handling the possible keyring issue after changing the password
   There is a keyring feature in Ubuntu that is used for keeping passwords locked and safe.

   When you reset the forgotten password, the keyring remains unlocked and you may see an error message
   like this.

   Open the Passwords and Keys application and here, delete the Login passwords.

   When you try to use Google Chrome again in Ubuntu, it will ask you to create a new keyring. Use
   the new login password as the keyring password.


---

