filename: howto-turn-desktop-setup-into-portable-package-to-run-on-any-machine-20260817.txt
https://www.howtogeek.com/how-i-turned-my-linux-desktop-setup-into-a-portable-package-i-can-run-on-any-machine/

How I turned my Linux desktop setup into a portable package I can run on any machine
Aug 16, 2026

   I had spent months refining my Linux desktop environment. Every config file had a place, my command
   line tools were selected for the way I worked, and my desktop shortcuts, panel layout, themes, and
   custom scripts were configured exactly the way I wanted.

   I had already automated much of the process. I could clone my repositories, install packages, restore
   configuration files, and run setup scripts. Even then, rebuilding a Linux desktop from scratch
   remained a time-consuming process. Instead of rebuilding the system after installing Linux, I wanted
   to take the system I was already using, turn it into an ISO, and install that environment on another
   machine. That led me to Penguin´s Eggs.

Discovering Penguin´s Eggs

Turning a running Linux installation into an ISO
   [https://penguins-eggs.net/]Penguin´s Eggs is designed to remaster an existing Linux installation into a
   bootable hybrid ISO.  The current project supports all major distros. Basically, it takes the running
   operating system, prepares the filesystem for remastering, creates a compressed SquashFS image, and
   builds the bootable ISO around it.

   Penguin´s Eggs is not something new and has been around for some time and has also evolved
   internally. The command-line interface is exposed through eggs, while coa is the Go-based
   orchestrator and works as an interchangeable command alias.

Configuring Penguin´s Eggs

Choosing what goes into the image
   Before starting the remastering process, I used the configuration interface:
$> sudo coa config

   The current configuration interface lets you modify settings such as the live user´s password,
   compression algorithm, compression level, ISO filename prefix, and the list of files that should
   be excluded from the SquashFS image. The settings are stored under /etc/penguins-eggs.d/.

   This is useful because the default configuration does not have to dictate how every ISO is produced.
   For example, if I want to exclude a directory from the image, I can add it to the custom exclusion
   list rather than manually deleting the directory from my source system.

   The configuration step also gave me a chance to decide whether I wanted a clean live system or a
   clone containing my user data. A normal remaster produces a live system without preserving the
   complete contents of /home. The clone mode is specifically intended to preserve users and /home in
   the generated ISO.

Creating the bootable ISO

Remastering the running system
   Once the system was cleaned and configured, I could create the ISO with the current command:
$> sudo coa remaster

   The resulting ISO is written to the Penguin´s Eggs working directory, which defaults to /home/eggs.

   Since I wanted the ISO to contain my user environment, I used clone mode:
$> sudo eggs remaster clone

   The clone option tells Penguin´s Eggs to preserve users and /home in the generated image.

   During remastering, Penguin´s Eggs builds the live filesystem and packages it into a bootable hybrid
   ISO. The current project supports both BIOS and UEFI booting, which makes the resulting image
   suitable for testing in a virtual machine or writing to a USB drive.

   The amount of time required depends heavily on how much data needs to be compressed. A system with a
   large home directory and many installed applications will naturally take longer than a minimal
   desktop installation.

   When the process finished, I checked the output:
$> ls -lh /home/eggs/*.iso

   At this point, my running Linux installation had become a bootable image.

Testing the result

Booting the ISO before installing it
   I did not immediately install the image onto another physical machine. A virtual machine provided a
   much safer test.

   I booted the ISO with QEMU and checked whether the desktop environment, applications,
   configuration files, and scripts appeared as expected. This was also a useful way to catch problems
   before writing the image to a USB drive.

   The live system (chick of penguin... it´s a fun name!) gave me a close representation of the
   environment I had captured. My desktop configuration was present, my applications were available, and
   the files included in clone mode were accessible. The next step was testing the installation process
   itself. The current installer is exposed through sysinstall. Penguin´s Eggs supports Calamares as
   a graphical installer and Krill as its terminal-based installer.

   For a graphical installation, the current command is:
$> sudo coa sysinstall calamares

   For the terminal interface:
$> sudo coa sysinstall krill

   Krill, which is Penguin´s default, is particularly interesting because it provides a text-based
   installation workflow for systems where a graphical environment is unavailable.

   I used the installer inside the virtual machine and completed a fresh installation to a virtual disk.
   After rebooting, the installed environment looked much closer to my original system than a
   conventional fresh Linux installation would have.

   The real test was moving the ISO to another machine. Instead of installing a distro, I booted the
   machine from the ISO and started the installer. The process still required some normal Linux
   installation work, such as selecting the target disk and configuring the installation, but the
   environment itself was already prepared.

   I could also use the same image in a virtual machine when I wanted to test changes before applying
   them to my main installation. Hardware differences still matter. A desktop with a different GPU,
   storage controller, network adapter, or display configuration can require additional work after
   installation. Penguin´s Eggs handles much of the distro and boot configuration, but it cannot
   eliminate every hardware-specific issue.

My Linux environment is now portable
   There is an obvious limitation to cloning a running workstation. A Linux installation configured
   around one GPU, a particular storage layout, or a specific network interface can behave differently
   after being moved to another computer. The portable ISO approach works best when the source system is
   kept reasonably hardware independent. Once that limitation is understood, though, the benefits become
   much more practical.

   For me, the biggest advantage is the time saved when rebuilding a workstation. I no longer have to
   remember every package, desktop preference, and small configuration change that accumulated over
   months of use. My Linux environment has become something I can capture, test, store, and deploy
   again. That is a much more useful form of reproducibility than keeping a collection of dotfiles on
   Git alone.


---

