filename: iptables_block-ip-address_20230808.txt
https://tecadmin.net/iptables-block-ip-address/

How to Block an IP Address in Linux Using Iptables
August 5, 2023

   Iptables is a powerful and flexible firewall tool built into the Linux operating system. It is used
   to establish, manage, and configure the tables of IP packet filter rules. One of the common uses of
   Iptables is to block or restrict access from a specific IP address or a range of IP addresses.

   This article provides a step-by-step guide on how to block an IP address in Linux using Iptables.
   Remember that you must have superuser (root) privileges to modify Iptables rules.

What is Iptables?
   Iptables is a command-line firewall utility that uses policy chains to allow or block traffic. When a
   connection tries to establish itself on your system, Iptables looks for a rule in its list to match
   it. If it doesn't find one, it resorts to the default action.

Blocking an IP address with Iptables

Step 1: Accessing the Terminal
   First, open the Terminal. You can either find it in the Applications menu, or you can press `Ctrl +
   Alt + T` for a shortcut to open the Terminal.

Step 2: Listing Current Iptables Rules
   Before you add a new rule to block an IP address, it is good practice to check the current Iptables
   rules. This way, you'll be aware of any rules that may already be in place. Use the following
   command:
$> sudo iptables -L -v

Step 3: Blocking a Specific IP Address
   To block a specific IP address, use the following command, where 192.168.0.100 should be replaced
   with the IP address you want to block.
$> sudo iptables -A INPUT -s 192.168.0.100 -j DROP

   Here is a breakdown of the command:
     * The '-A INPUT' flag appends or adds a rule to the input chain.
     * The '-s' flag followed by the IP address specifies the source address of the packets.
     * The '-j DROP' flag instructs Iptables to drop the packets from the specified IP address.

Step 4: Blocking a Range of IP Addresses
   If you want to block a range of IP addresses instead of a single address, use the following command:
$> sudo iptables -A INPUT -s 192.168.0.0/24 -j DROP

   In the example above, the IP address range is 192.168.0.0 to 192.168.0.255. The '/24' denotes the
   subnet mask, representing the range of IP addresses.

Saving the Rules
   Iptables rules are ephemeral. If you restart your system, all of your changes will be lost. To save
   your rules, you can use the iptables-persistent tool.

   Install iptables-persistent:
$> sudo apt-get install iptables-persistent

   During the installation, you will be asked if you want to save current rules. Choose "Yes". If you
   need to update the saved rules later, you can use the following command:
$> sudo netfilter-persistent save

Conclusion
   In this guide, you've learned how to block a specific IP address or a range of IP addresses using
   Iptables in Linux. Remember that blocking an IP address should be done with care. You should only
   block IP addresses when you're sure that it won't disrupt the normal operation of your system.

   It's important to note that Iptables is a powerful tool that provides a robust and complex set of
   features. You can create more advanced rules and configurations to fine-tune your server's firewall
   according to your needs. Always make sure you understand a rule before adding it to your Iptables
   configuration.

   As a responsible system administrator, it's also a good practice to keep logs and documentation of
   all changes you make to your Iptables rules. This practice will help you maintain your firewall
   configuration and troubleshoot any potential issues that may arise.


---

