filename: mesa_howto-upgrade-mesa-drivers-on-ubuntu_20240626.txt
https://linuxcapable.com/how-to-upgrade-mesa-drivers-on-ubuntu-linux/

How to Upgrade Mesa Drivers on Ubuntu 24.04, 22.04, or 20.04
June 24, 2024

   Mesa is an open-source 3D graphics driver used on Linux systems to render high-quality 3D graphics.
   It enables advanced hardware acceleration, shading, and other graphics-related tasks. Mesa is a
   powerful tool that enhances the user experience on Linux systems, making it a popular choice for
   gamers and professionals.

   Before continuing, here are some of the features of Mesa drivers:
     * Support for OpenGL and Vulkan APIs: Mesa drivers support the most popular graphics APIs,
       including OpenGL and Vulkan. This allows users to take full advantage of the latest graphics
       features and applications.
     * Cross-platform support: Mesa drivers work on various platforms, including Linux, macOS, and
       Windows. This makes it a versatile tool for developers creating applications running on multiple
       platforms.
     * Open-source: Mesa is an open-source project, meaning anyone can contribute to its development.
       This allows the community to collaborate and improve the quality of the driver over time.
     * Compatibility with a wide range of hardware: Mesa drivers are designed to work with a wide range
       of hardware, including graphics cards from popular manufacturers like NVIDIA, AMD, and Intel.
     * Improved performance: Mesa drivers can significantly improve the performance of
       graphics-intensive applications, such as games and video editing software.
     * Regular updates: The Mesa project is actively maintained and receives regular updates to improve
       its features, performance, and compatibility.

   Now, let's move on to the main article on how to upgrade your Mesa drivers.

Check the Current Mesa Version
   Before upgrading your Mesa drivers on Ubuntu, it's essential to check your current version to ensure
   a successful upgrade. To do this, open a terminal window by pressing "Ctrl+Alt+T" and enter the
   following command:
$> glxinfo | grep "OpenGL version"

   Once you run this command, your current Mesa version will be displayed in the terminal window. It's
   crucial to take note of this version number before proceeding with the upgrade. This information is
   helpful if you encounter any issues after the upgrade and must revert to your original Mesa version.

   Example format output you will see as a guide:
OpenGL version string: x.x (Compatibility Profile) Mesa x.x.x

   If the previously provided commands and output do not work, installing the "mesa-utils" package may
   be necessary:
$> sudo apt install mesa-utils

   This package provides various utilities and libraries for Mesa drivers and can help resolve Mesa
   configuration or functionality issues.

Update Ubuntu before Upgrading Mesa Drivers
   To prevent conflicts, ensure your desktop is up-to-date before installing your Mesa drivers. The
   following command can help you do this.
$> sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade

Import "kisak-mesa" LaunchPAD PPA
   The kisak-mesa fresh PPA is a popular source for updated Mesa drivers on Ubuntu-based systems. To use
   this PPA, run the following command:
$> sudo add-apt-repository ppa:kisak/kisak-mesa -y

   Note: This PPA does support short-term releases but focuses more on LTS as priority support.

Proceed to Upgrade Mesa Drivers
   After adding the kisak-mesa fresh PPA to your system, updating the package cache to reflect the
   changes is essential. This is necessary as many packages that need to be upgraded are tied to the
   Mesa drivers. To update the package cache, run the following command in the terminal:
$> sudo apt update

   You should notice multiple updates related to Mesa drivers during the update process. Once the update
   is complete, the next step is to upgrade the drivers to the latest version.

   To do this, run the following command in the terminal:
$> sudo apt upgrade

   This command will upgrade all installed packages, including the Mesa drivers, to their latest
   version. Once the upgrade is complete, you can check the Mesa driver version using the following
   command in the terminal:
$> glxinfo | grep "OpenGL version"

   Example output you should see which should be different from the original:
   Mesa drivers upgraded on Ubuntu (BUTTON) Upgraded Mesa drivers on Ubuntu desktop

   This command will display the current Mesa driver version installed on your system. If the version
   displayed matches the expected version, the upgrade succeeded.

Conclusion: Upgrading Mesa Drivers
   Following these steps, you can upgrade the Mesa drivers on your Ubuntu system and take advantage of
   the latest features and improvements. It's important to note that the version numbers used in this
   example may differ from the current version available during your upgrade. Additionally, creating a
   backup of any critical data or configuration files before upgrading is recommended to prevent data
   loss or other potential issues. By taking these precautions, you can ensure a smooth and stress-free
   experience with the upgraded Mesa drivers on your Ubuntu system.



---

