filename: netstat-command-20260505.txt
https://linuxize.com/post/netstat-command-in-linux/

netstat Command in Linux: Network Connections and Statistics
May 2, 2026

Using the netstat command to show network connections in Linux
When something on a server is holding port 80, a connection is refusing to close, or a service is not
reachable from the outside, the first question is almost always the same: what is actually listening,
and who is talking to whom. For years, the answer on Linux was the netstat command.

netstat is part of the classic net-tools package and prints network connections, listening ports, routing
tables, interface counters, and per-protocol statistics. It has been deprecated in favor of ss and ip ,
but it is still installed on many systems and the tool many sysadmins reach for first. This guide explains
how to read its output and which flags cover the cases you run into day to day.

Install netstat
On most modern distributions, net-tools is not installed by default. If netstat is not available,
install it with your package manager.

On Ubuntu, Debian, and Derivatives:
$> sudo apt install net-tools

On Fedora, RHEL, and Derivatives:
$> sudo dnf install net-tools

Once the package is installed, verify the binary is on your path:
$> netstat --version

netstat Syntax
The general form of the command is:
$> netstat [OPTIONS]

Run without options, netstat prints a list of open non-listening sockets, which is rarely what you want. In
practice, you almost always pass a combination of flags that describe what kind of sockets you care about
(TCP, UDP, Unix), what state they are in, and how you want the output formatted.

List All Connections
To list every connection, both listening and established, use the -a option:
$> sudo netstat -a

The output is divided into two parts. The top lists Internet sockets with columns for protocol, receive
and send queue sizes, local and foreign address, and state. The bottom lists Unix domain sockets used
for local inter-process communication.

Running netstat with sudo is recommended because without it, the command cannot read socket ownership
for processes that belong to other users.

Show TCP and UDP Connections
The -t and -u flags filter the output by protocol. To show only TCP connections:
$> sudo netstat -at

To show only UDP connections:
$> sudo netstat -au

You can combine both flags to get TCP and UDP together:
$> sudo netstat -atu

Show Listening Ports
When you want to know which services are accepting new connections, use the -l option. For TCP, it
restricts the output to sockets in the LISTEN state. UDP does not use the same connection states, but
UDP sockets that are ready to receive traffic are still shown.
$> sudo netstat -tuln

The combined flags read as: show TCP (-t) and UDP (-u) sockets that are listening (-l), with numeric
addresses and ports (-n). The output looks similar to this:
output

Proto    Recv-Q    Send-Q Local Address           Foreign Address         State
tcp           0         0 0.0.0.0:22              0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN
tcp           0         0 127.0.0.1:3306          0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN
tcp6          0         0 :::80                   :::*                    LISTEN
udp           0         0 0.0.0.0:68              0.0.0.0:*

From the output, we can see that SSH is listening on all interfaces on port 22, MySQL is bound to
localhost only on port 3306, and a web server is listening on port 80 over IPv6.

Show the Process Using a Port
To find out which program owns a socket, add the -p option. It prints the PID and the process name next
to each connection:
$> sudo netstat -tulnp

output
Proto   Recv-Q   Send-Q   Local Address    Foreign Address   State    PID/Program name
tcp          0        0   0.0.0.0:22       0.0.0.0:*         LISTEN   812/sshd
tcp          0        0   127.0.0.1:3306   0.0.0.0:*         LISTEN   1034/mysqld
tcp6         0        0   :::80            :::*              LISTEN   1591/nginx: master

The PID/Program name column ties each listening port to a process. This is the quickest way to find out
which service is holding a port when you get an Address already in use error.

To check one specific port, pipe the output to grep :
$> sudo netstat -tulnp | grep ':80'

If the command prints a row, a process is listening on port 80. If it prints nothing, no TCP or UDP
listener matched that port on the local system.

Show Numeric Output
By default, netstat resolves IP addresses to hostnames and port numbers to service names (for example,
22 becomes ssh). On a busy system, this can be slow because each address needs a DNS lookup.

The -n option disables name resolution and prints raw numbers:
$> sudo netstat -n

Numeric output is also easier to pipe into other tools such as grep or awk, because the field values
are predictable.

Continuous Monitoring
The -c option tells netstat to print the output every second until you stop it with Ctrl+C. It is useful
when you want to watch a connection appear, change state, and close:
$> sudo netstat -atnc

Each iteration prints the full table again, so it is best used together with a filter such as grep to
isolate a single connection.

Show TCP Connection States
TCP connections move through states such as ESTABLISHED, LISTEN, TIME_WAIT, and CLOSE_WAIT. To show
active TCP sockets with numeric addresses, run:
$> sudo netstat -ant

The State column tells you where each connection is in the TCP lifecycle:

output
Proto    Recv-Q    Send-Q   Local Address           Foreign Address         State
tcp           0         0   192.168.1.10:22         192.168.1.5:52710       ESTABLISHED
tcp           0         0   192.168.1.10:80         203.0.113.25:51422      TIME_WAIT
tcp           0         0   127.0.0.1:3306          127.0.0.1:41834         CLOSE_WAIT

ESTABLISHED means the connection is active. TIME_WAIT is normal after a connection closes. A large number
of CLOSE_WAIT entries can mean the local application is not closing sockets correctly.

To show only established TCP connections, filter the output:
$> sudo netstat -ant | grep ESTABLISHED

For new troubleshooting work, ss gives better built-in state filters, such as ss -tn state established.

Count Connections
On busy web servers, you may want a quick count instead of a full connection table. To count all current
TCP connections that involve port 80, run:
$> sudo netstat -ant | grep ':80' | wc -l

To count only established connections on port 80, add the TCP state to the filter:
$> sudo netstat -ant | grep ':80' | grep ESTABLISHED | wc -l

These counts are useful as a quick signal, but they are not a replacement for application metrics. The
number can change while the pipeline is running, especially on high-traffic systems.

Display the Routing Table
To print the kernel IP routing table, use the -r option:
$> netstat -rn

output

Kernel IP routing table
Destination     Gateway         Genmask         Flags   MSS Window  irtt Iface
0.0.0.0         192.168.1.1     0.0.0.0         UG        0 0          0 eth0
192.168.1.0     0.0.0.0         255.255.255.0   U         0 0          0 eth0

The first row is the default route, which sends all traffic not matching another rule to 192.168.1.1. The
ip route command from ip is the modern equivalent and is what you should use on new systems.

Interface Statistics
The -i option prints a per-interface summary that includes received and transmitted packets, errors,
drops, and the MTU:
$> netstat -i

output

Kernel Interface table
Iface   MTU    RX-OK   RX-ERR RX-DRP TX-OK  TX-ERR TX-DRP Flg
eth0    1500   2345678 0      12     1987654 0     0      BMRU
lo      65536  55432   0      0      55432   0     0      LRU

A growing RX-ERR or TX-ERR column is a hint that you have a cabling, duplex, or driver issue on that
interface.

Protocol Statistics
To print a summary of statistics for each protocol, use -s:
$> netstat -s

The output is long and grouped by protocol (Ip, Tcp, Udp, and so on). It includes counters such as total
packets received, segments retransmitted, and connection resets. You can narrow the output to a single
protocol by combining -s with -t or -u:
$> netstat -st

netstat vs ss
On modern Linux distributions, ss is the recommended replacement for netstat. It is faster and reads
information directly from the kernel through Netlink, with richer filter support. The ip command replaces
the routing and interface parts of netstat.

A few common translations:
    netstat -tuln is equivalent to ss -tuln
    netstat -tulnp is equivalent to sudo ss -tulnp
    netstat -s maps to ss -s (a much shorter summary)
    netstat -i maps to ip -s link
    netstat -r maps to ip route

For a full walkthrough of the replacement tool, see the guide on the ss command.

Quick Reference

For a printable quick reference, see the netstat cheatsheet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Command                                   Description
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
netstat                                   Show active non-listening sockets
sudo netstat -a                           Show all listening and non-listening sockets
sudo netstat -at                          Show all TCP sockets
sudo netstat -au                          Show all UDP sockets
sudo netstat -tuln                        Show TCP and UDP listening sockets with numeric output
sudo netstat -tulnp                       Show listening sockets with PID and process name
sudo netstat -tulnp | grep ':80'          Find the process listening on port 80
sudo netstat -ant                         Show all TCP sockets with numeric addresses
sudo netstat -ant | grep ESTABLISHED      Show established TCP connections
sudo netstat -ant | grep ':80' | wc -l    Count TCP connections involving port 80
sudo netstat -atnc                        Refresh TCP connection output every second
netstat -rn                               Show the routing table with numeric addresses
netstat -i                                Show interface statistics
netstat -s                                Show protocol statistics
netstat -st                               Show TCP protocol statistics
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Troubleshooting
netstat: command not found
The net-tools package is not installed. Install it with your package manager, or use ss instead.

No PID/Program name column shown
You need to run the command with sudo. Without root privileges, netstat cannot read process information
for sockets owned by other users.

Output is slow or hangs
DNS resolution is slow or failing. Add the -n option to disable name lookups and print numeric addresses
and ports.

A port shows up as LISTEN on :: but not on 0.0.0.0
The service is listening on the IPv6 wildcard address. On systems with dual-stack enabled, this accepts
IPv4 traffic too. Check your IPv6 configuration if only IPv4 clients are failing.

FAQ
Is netstat deprecated?
Yes. The net-tools suite, which includes netstat, ifconfig, and route, has been deprecated for years in
favor of the iproute2 tools ss and ip. It is still functional and still shipped by most distributions,
but new scripts should target ss and ip.

What is the difference between netstat on Linux and Windows?
The command name is the same, and the general idea is the same, but the flags are different. This guide
covers the Linux version from net-tools. On Windows, the closest equivalents to netstat -tulnp are
netstat -ano and Get-NetTCPConnection in PowerShell.

How do I find what process is using a specific port?
Run sudo netstat -tulnp | grep ':PORT', replacing PORT with the port number. The last column shows the
PID and program name. With ss, the same query is sudo ss -tulnp 'sport = :PORT'.

Why is a port still TIME_WAIT after I stopped the service?
TIME_WAIT is a normal TCP state that keeps a closed connection around for a short period so late packets
can be handled safely. The kernel clears these entries automatically, usually within one or two minutes.
Conclusion

netstat remains useful when you need to inspect network connections on systems that still have net-tools
installed. For new scripts and current Linux systems, prefer ss for sockets and ip for routes and
interface statistics.


---

