filename: nmcli_connect-to-wifi_20230808.txt
https://www.makeuseof.com/connect-to-wifi-with-nmcli/

How to Connect to Wi-Fi Through the Linux Terminal With Nmcli
2023-08-04

   Connecting to Wi-Fi using the nmcli command is rather easy on Linux, with or without a graphical
   interface.

   Need to connect to the internet on your Linux device, but don't have an Ethernet port or access to
   graphical networking software? Here's how to connect to Wi-Fi in the Linux terminal using the nmcli
   command.

What Is nmcli?
   nmcli is the command-line interface for NetworkManager, a common Linux application for
   identifying and configuring internet connections. Many distributions have a graphical applet for
   using NetworkManager in a desktop environment, but you might not have access to a desktop if you're
   on a Linux server.

   Some methods of connecting with Wi-Fi through the terminal are a bit complicated, involving
   configuration files and knowing your PSK key.

   Not so with nmcli. Assuming you have a modern router, all you need to know is your network's SSID
   (the name of the network you want to connect to) and the network password, if it has one.

Step 1: Enable Your Wi-Fi Device
   The Wi-Fi card on your Linux PC can't connect to the internet unless it's enabled. To see the status
   of all your network interfaces, use this command:
$> nmcli dev status

   You should get a list of your network devices along with their type, state, and network connection
   info.

   If you're not sure whether your Wi-Fi device is enabled or not, you can check with this command:
$> nmcli radio wifi

   If the output shows that the Wi-Fi is disabled, you can enable it with the following command:
$> nmcli radio wifi on

Step 2: Identify a Wi-Fi Access Point
   If you don't know the name of your Wi-Fi access point, otherwise known as the SSID, you can find it
   by scanning for nearby Wi-Fi networks.
$> nmcli dev wifi list

   Note the name listed under SSID for the network you want to connect to. You'll need it for the next
   step.

Step 3: Connect to Wi-Fi With nmcli
   With Wi-Fi enabled and your SSID identified, you're now ready to connect. You can establish a
   connection with the following command:
$> sudo nmcli dev wifi connect network-ssid

   Replace network-ssid with the name of your network. If you have WEP or WPA security on your
   Wi-Fi, you can specify the network password in the command as well.
$> sudo nmcli dev wifi connect network-ssid password "network-password"

   Alternatively, if you don't want to write out your password onscreen, you can use the --ask option:
$> sudo nmcli --ask dev wifi connect network-ssid

   The system will now ask you to enter your network password without making it visible.

   Your device should now be connected to the internet. Test it with a ping:
$> ping google.com

   NetworkManager will save the connection and auto-connect on reboot, so you don't have to worry about
   issuing the command every time you boot your Linux machine.

Managing Network Connections on Linux With nmcli
   You can view all the saved connections by issuing the following command:
$> nmcli con show

   If you're connected to one network, but want to use a different connection, you can disconnect by
   switching the connection to down. You'll need to specify the SSID, or if you have multiple
   connections with the same SSID, use the UUID.
$> nmcli con down ssid/uuid

   To connect to another saved connection, simply pass the up option in the nmcli command. Make sure
   that you specify the SSID or UUID of the new network that you want to connect to.
$> nmcli con up ssid/uuid

Connecting to Wi-Fi Without a GUI on Linux
   You've now connected to your Wi-Fi network without using a graphical interface, making you a much
   more versatile Linux user.

   If you need to move files wirelessly, there are many Linux applications that allow for that, with or
   without a desktop environment.


---

