filename: rar_howto_create-extract-rar-files_20240920.txt
https://www.maketecheasier.com/create-extract-rar-files-on-linux/

   Create Extract And List Rar Files Linux Feature Image
   Sep 17, 2024

   RAR files are a popular format on Windows, allowing you to efficiently manage large files and
   share them across platforms. On Linux, though the TAR format is more commonly used, handling RAR
   files is just as simple. But what if you need to extract a RAR file or share it with a Windows user
   directly from the Linux terminal?

   In this article, we'll cover the steps for creating the RAR files and how to extract an archive using
   the unrar command on Linux.

Installing Rar and Unrar Commands on Linux
   To handle RAR files on Linux, you need two key utilities: rar and unrar. Installing them is simple
   and depends on your specific Linux distribution.

   For Debian-based distros like Ubuntu or its derivatives, you can install both by running:
$> sudo apt install rar unrar

   For Arch Linux, run:
$> sudo pacman -S rar unrar

   If you're using Red Hat-based distribution (RHEL, CentOS, Fedora), first set up EPEL repository,
   then use:
$> sudo yum install epel-release
$> sudo yum install rar unrar

   Alternatively, if you prefer building RAR from the source code, download its TAR files from the
   official RAR website. After the installation is finished, you'll be all set to begin creating and
   working with RAR files on your Linux system.

Create a RAR File on Linux
   To create a RAR file, first, you require some files or directories that can be compressed and
   archived. For the demonstration, let's take some sample text files.

   First, create the text files using the touch command:
$> touch file1.txt file2.txt file3.txt

   Next, you can add these files to a RAR archive by following rar command:
$> rar a test.rar file1.txt file2.txt file3.txt

   One thing to note here is the use of the a flag. It will add all the files or directories to the
   archive using the rar command. Next, you can specify the RAR file name followed by the list of all
   the files you want to archive in a RAR file.

   Afterward, you can use the ls command to display the contents of the current directory, which
   will help verify whether the RAR file was successfully created:
$> ls

Extract RAR Files on Linux
   To extract a RAR file on Linux, you can use the unrar command followed by the e flag. This flag tells
   the unrar command to extract the archive file content in the current directory.

   Now use the unrar command to extract the RAR file we created earlier:
$> unrar e test.rar

Extracting RAR File to a Specific Location
   If you'd like to extract files from a RAR archive into a specific directory instead of the current
   one, you can modify the unrar command like this:
$> unrar e test.rar /home/linux/Extract

   In this revised command, the -d describes the destination directory. Additionally, you can change the
   file location of the output extracted file.

   Note: Before you extract the RAR file, first make sure the directory you specified already exists,
   else the command will not work.

   When extracting files using the unrar command, if your archive contains multiple directories, the
   default e option will only display a flat list of files without showing the directory structure in
   the terminal. However, if you want to see the directories and their files listed separately,
   reflecting the proper directory structure, you can use the x option instead.

   For example, to extract and display the directory structure in the terminal, use:
$> unrar x test.rar

   This will list the files along with their corresponding directories in the terminal, making it easier
   to understand the archive's structure.

List RAR Files on Linux
   Sometimes, you may get RAR files from untrusted sources and want to ensure they are safe before
   extracting them. In such cases, you can use the listing feature of the unrar command to inspect the
   contents without extracting the archive.

   By using the l flag, you can view the file structure and metadata of the RAR archive. For instance,
   to examine the contents of a file test.rar, run the following command:
$> unrar l test.rar

   This will display detailed information such as file sizes, permissions, creation date and
   time, and the total number of files within the archive.

Password Protect Your RAR Files
   While sharing a RAR file, it's important to consider the security of your sensitive information to
   restrict it from unauthorized access. To protect your files, you can either set a password or
   lock the file to prevent any modifications.

   RAR files typically use AES-256 encryption when protected by a password, which is a robust
   encryption standard. Also, AES-256 is highly secure, which makes it difficult to crack without the
   correct password.

   To set a password, run:
$> rar a -p test.rar

   Now, if anyone wants to access your archive, they need a password.

   In addition to password protection, you can stop others from altering the RAR file by locking it. Use
   the k option for this:
$> rar k test.rar

   Locking a RAR file prevents modifications but does not block access or extraction. To restrict access
   entirely, you must use password protection. A locked file simply ensures that no one can alter the
   contents of the archive.

Wrapping up
   Whether you're extracting files or creating secure, password-protected archives, the rar and unrar
   commands provide full control over your data. There are also various online tools available that
   can be used to extract RAR files.


---

