filename: system_change-open-file-limit_20210126.txt
https://www.linuxshelltips.com/change-open-file-limit-in-linux/

How to Change Open File Limit in Linux
January 25, 2021

   In Linux, there are limits defined by the system for anything that consumes resources. For example,
   there are limits on how many arguments can be passed to a certain command, how many threads can run
   at the same time, etc.

   Similarly, there is a limit on the number of open files. As you might know, an open file is actively
   being used in some of the other programs and hence consumes memory.
   You can view and modify the open file limit with the command 'ulimit'.

   Now, there are two types of limits defined: Hard limit and Soft limit.
     * The hard limit for open files is a statically set value, and can only be altered by the 'root'
       user of Linux.
     * The soft limit is one that can be altered by processes dynamically, i.e., in the runtime, if the
       process is in need of more open files than the number allowed by the soft limit.

   Needless to say, a soft limit is something that could lead to security issues.

Check Open File Limits in Linux

   To view or list the hard limit of files, run:
$> ulimit -Hn

   Similarly, for viewing soft limit, run:
$> ulimit -Sn

   Here the 'S' and 'H' stand for soft and hard limits respectively, whereas the 'n' denotes the number
   of open files.

Change Open File Limits in Linux
   Let's now try to modify these limits by simply adding a third argument for the new value of the limit
   after 'Sn' or 'Hn'.
$> ulimit -Sn 5000
$> ulimit -Hn 5000

   Change Open File Limit in Linux Change Open File Limit in Linux

   However, the limits altered in this way remain modified temporarily till the session (i.e. the
   terminal) is open. Follow the steps below to permanently modify the limits.

Permanently Set Open File Limits in Linux
   Open the file '/etc/security/limits.conf' in 'vim' or any editor of your choice. Note that this is a
   write-protected file and should be opened with 'sudo' or as an administrator.
$> sudo vim /etc/security/limits.conf

   Note that the limits can be set for all users, or for individual users. The syntax to set a hard
   limit is:
* hard nofile 5000

   The '*' is signifying that the limit is for all users. The second string on the line is a type of
   limit, which is 'hard' in this case.

   The third string is the limit that we want to modify. In our case, it is 'nofile', i.e. number of
   files. Like this other limits can also be set here, Eg. 'noproc' for a number of processes. Finally,
   the fourth string is the new limit to be set for the number of files.

   If you want to set the limit only for a particular user, you can do so like the following:
abhi soft nofile 5000

   Here 'abhi' is the name of the user.

   Now, we will add these lines to the file and then see if the limit has been altered.
   Set Open File Limit in Linux Set Open File Limit in Linux

   Save and exit the file.

   These limits will require the user to logout and log back in, as the older limits are still being
   considered by running programs. Run ulimit again to verify if the limits are indeed changed.
$> ulimit

Conclusion
   In this article, we have seen how to change the limit on the number of open files in Linux. Run
   'ulimit --help' if you want to know the command in more detail.


---
