filename: tmate_howto-share-linux-terminal_20240626.txt
https://tecadmin.net/how-to-share-linux-terminal-with-tmate/

How to Share Linux Terminal with tmate: A Step-by-Step
June 24, 2024

   Sharing your terminal can be useful in many situations, like when you need help with a problem or
   want to show someone how to do something. One easy way to do this on Linux is by using a tool called
   tmate. In this tutorial, I will guide you through the process of installing and using tmate to share
   your terminal in a few simple steps.

Sharing Linux Terminal using Tmate
   tmate is a fork of tmux, a terminal multiplexer. It allows you to create multiple terminal sessions
   inside a single window and switch between them easily. tmate adds the ability to share your terminal
   sessions over the internet, making it perfect for remote assistance or collaboration.

Step 1: Installing tmate
   First, you need to install tmate on your Linux system. The installation process may vary slightly
   depending on your Linux distribution.
     * For Debian/Ubuntu
       Open your terminal and type the following command:
$> sudo apt-get update
$> sudo apt-get install tmate

     * For Fedora
       Open your terminal and type:
$> sudo dnf install tmate

     * For Arch Linux
       Open your terminal and type:
$> sudo pacman -S tmate

Step 2: Starting tmate
   Once tmate is installed, you can start it by simply typing tmate in your terminal:
$> tmate

   When you run this command, tmate will create a new session and display some information. This
   includes several connection strings that you can use to share your session.
   Publicially Sharing Linux Terminal with Tmate Sharing Linux Terminal with Tmate

Step 3: Sharing Your Terminal Session
   Once you run the tmate command, you will see output similar to this:

Connecting to ssh.tmate.io...
Note: clear your terminal before sharing readonly access
web session read only: https://tmate.io/t/ro-Yb9E9ybuRWXn3GrRUVURdTrRr
ssh session read only: ssh ro-Yb9E9ybuRWXn3GrRUVURdTrRr@sfo2.tmate.io
web session: https://tmate.io/t/SfdDVuAwxt9pp5QsWPBe6dBMF
ssh session: ssh SfdDVuAwxt9pp5QsWPBe6dBMF@sfo2.tmate.io

   These are the details you can share with others:
     * SSH Session: This allows someone to connect to your terminal via SSH.
     * Read-Only Web Session: This provides a web link that others can use to view your terminal without
       making any changes.
     * Full Control Web Session: This provides a web link that allows others to fully interact with your
       terminal.

Sharing via SSH
   If you want someone to connect via SSH, share the SSH session string with them. They will need to
   have an SSH client installed. For example, if the SSH session string is 'ssh user@tmate.io',
   they would connect by typing:
$> ssh SfdDVuAwxt9pp5QsWPBe6dBMF@sfo2.tmate.io

Sharing a Web Session
   If you prefer to share a web link, you can choose between read-only or full control. Just copy the
   appropriate URL and send it to the person you want to share your terminal with. They can open the
   link in any web browser to view or interact with your terminal.

Step 4: Managing Your tmate Session
   While sharing your terminal, you might want to manage your tmate session. Here are some basic
   commands to help you:
    1. Detaching from a Session
       You can detach from a tmate session without closing it by pressing Ctrl + B followed by D. This
       will leave the session running in the background, and you can reattach to it later.
    2. Reattaching to a Session
       To reattach to a running tmate session, use the following command:
$> tmate attach

       If you have multiple sessions, you can list them and choose which one to attach to:
$> tmate list-sessions
$> tmate attach-session -t

    3. Ending a Session
       When you are done and want to close the tmate session, you can simply type exit in the terminal.
       This will terminate the session for everyone connected.

Step 5: Using tmate Safely
   While tmate is a powerful tool for sharing your terminal, it is important to use it safely. Here are
   some tips to keep in mind:
     * Share with Trusted People: Only share your terminal with people you trust, especially if you are
       giving full control.
     * Monitor Activity: Keep an eye on what others are doing in your terminal. You can see their
       commands and actions in real-time.
     * End the Session When Done: Make sure to close the session when you no longer need it to prevent
       unauthorized access.

Conclusion
   Sharing your terminal with tmate on Linux is a simple and effective way to collaborate with others or
   get help remotely. By following the steps in this tutorial, you can easily set up and manage a shared
   terminal session. Remember to use tmate responsibly and keep your sessions secure.

   With this guide, you should be able to install tmate, start a session, share it with others, and
   manage your terminal sessions effectively.


---

