filename: ubuntu-14-10_10-things-to-do-after-installing_20141027.txt
http://scienceblogs.com/gregladen/2014/10/24/10-things-to-do-after-installing-ubuntu-14-10-utopic-unicorn/

10+ Things To Do After Installing Ubuntu 14.10 Utopic Unicorn

[HumanEv]Posted by Greg Laden on October 24, 2014
(9)
More >>
xubuntu-utopic

Here is a list of things to do after you have installed Ubuntu 14.10 Utopic
Unicorn.

There is some discussion of whether or not you should upgraded to 14.10 here,
but the short version is, for most people an upgrade from 14.04 is not
necessary but not a bad idea, and an upgrade from any earlier version is a very
good idea. Mostly, though, you should just upgrade.

One could ask the question, should you be installing Ubuntu with Unity. You
have to like Unity. I personally like to have a wider range of desktop options
than Ubuntu with Unity allows, but for a notebook or laptop where you are going
to be using one application at a time, usually use GUI apps, and like to have
your computer integrated fairly seamlessly to social networking services, etc.,
it is a good option.

But, as is always the case with any operating system, you can either use it out
of the box or change a few things. Because of OpenSource related licensing
things a few things need to be done by you that would normally be done by the
provider of the OS (but this is a free OS so you don‚Äôt get that) but most of
these changes are just to make the OS more like you like it. So pick and
choose.

First, before you do anything‚Ä¶

Run these commands to bring your system up to date, even if you just installed
Ubuntu 14.10.


sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get dist-upgrade

Reminder: When you start a command with ‚Äúsudo‚Äù you will be asked to enter your
password. If you use ‚Äúsudo‚Äù again soon after, the system figures a bad guy did
not konk you on the head to take over your computer, and it is probably you
issuing the command so it does not ask for your password again. After a while,
the system figures you probably did get konked on the head and will attempt to
verify your identity by asking for your password.

Also, for the various commands being suggested here (and I should say you are
totally on your own and I take no responsibility if you muck up your system,
good luck and have a nice day) you may have to enter a ‚Äúy‚Äù (for yes) or do some
other things, so keep an eye on your computer.

Install Better or More Appropriate Graphics Card Drivers

Using Software & Updates ~ ‚ÄúAdditional Drivers‚Äù tab ~ Do what it says there

Install Ubuntu Restricted Extras

This includes some fonts, java, the flash plugin, DVD playback ability, and so
on. You need some of this stuff. Use this command:


sudo apt-get install ubuntu-restricted-extras

Install additional extras for multimedia

To install DVD playback ability:

sudo /usr/share/doc/libdvdread4/install-css.sh

Some, many, users will want additional codecs:

sudo apt-get install gstreamer0.10-plugins-ugly gxine libdvdread4 totem-mozilla
icedax tagtool easytag id3tool lame nautilus-script-audio-convert libmad0
mpg321 libavcodec-extra

Adjust the degree to which the Ubuntu Unity Dashboard annoys you and violates
your privacy

Method 1

System Settings ~ Privacy and Security ~ Turn stuff off, especially the online
items.

Unity now has the settings people usually turn off unset by default, so you may
not need this.

Method 2

If you do need to turn off all the settings check out Fix Ubuntu has a nice
script that will maximally crack down on Unity. You can get the script and run
it right away, if you are trusting (it looks trustworthy to me) with this nifty
one liner:


wget -q -O - https://fixubuntu.com/fixubuntu.sh | bash

While you are addressing privacy, you may or may not want to disable system
crash reports. Sending system crash reports to Ubuntu is probably the polite
thing to do, but you may not want to. You will need to edit a file to do this.

Open the file with sudo because it is a file you can only modify and save as a
quasi-super-user:


sudo gedit /etc/default/apport

Then find the line that says

enabled=1


and change it to


enabled=0

Save the file, close the text editor, and now at the terminal enter:


sudo service apport stop

Put your name back on the top menu bar panel

You might like the name of the user showing, especially if more than one entity
uses your machine.

Name on:

gsettings set com.canonical.indicator.session show-real-name-on-panel true

Name off:

gsettings set com.canonical.indicator.session show-real-name-on-panel false

Put the damn menus where they are supposed to be

Ubuntu Macified their Unity experience a while back by moving the menus that go
with applications to the menu bar on the top of the screen. This breaks the
Linux Philosophy by requiring a menu bar in a particular place. Then, they made
it even more useless by making the menus disappear until you run at them with
the mouse. With 14.04 and now 14.10 you can undo this travesty.

System Settings ~ Appearance ~ Behavior ~ Show the menus for a window ~ In the
window‚Äôs title bar

Resize menu bars and panels

Linux users apparently would not stand for having panels and menu bars
unscalable. Another feature taken away by Ubuntu Unity, but now with 14.10, you
can make this adjustment.

System Settings ~ Displays ~ Scale for menu and title bars ~ Use the slider
thingies

Install TweakTools or Unity Tweak Tools

This will allow you to tweek things. TweakTools is a Gnome tool, Unity Tweak
Tools is specificall for the Unity Desktop (that yo just installed). They are
not the same, you may want both. They merely give you access to things that are
already there that you can tweak.


sudo apt-get install unity-tweak-tool gnome-tweak-tool

Turn off the most annoying scrollbars ever invented

Some say you let designers design your operating system, and users will later
catch up. I say to them, Baaaaa.

The odd weird looking essentially useless scrollbars that plague Ubuntu Unity
can be gotten ride of by typing this command:


gsettings set com.canonical.desktop.interface scrollbar-mode normal

If you realize you like these new fangled scrollbars later, you can put them
back like this:


gsettings reset com.canonical.desktop.interface scrollbar-mode

Turn Nautilus Recursive vs Typeahead Search Off and ON

After you play around with the newest version of the file manager Nautilus, you
may find that you prefer one or the other behaviors in the search bar. I‚Äôve not
decided. Switch recursive search on:


Terminal Command:
gsettings set org.gnome.nautilus.preferences enable-interactive-search false

Switch to typeahead search:


gsettings set org.gnome.nautilus.preferences enable-interactive-search true

Set up your online accounts (facebook, twitter, etc)

Seetings ~ Online Accounts ~ Then do obvious stuff there

Laptop users: Power Management

There are things one did with 14.04 to enable power management and related
features, or to improve them. I am not certain what the best course of action
is for 14.10, so I‚Äôm not going to suggest anything here. I‚Äôll update this
section at a later time. (Feel free to make suggestions below.)

Meanwhile, you may have a look at this, which covers 14.04 and other
distributions.

Install a bunch of stuff

Ubuntu is a bit light on file archiving software. You may want to install more:


sudo apt-get install p7zip-rar p7zip-full unace unrar zip unzip sharutils rar
uudeview mpack arj cabextract file-roller

Adobe Flash Plugin


sudo apt-get install flashplugin-installer

Install the latest version of Google Chrome. I don‚Äôt think it will be found in
the software center, so check here, or go here and press the right buttons.
Then you can Watch Netflix on Linux!

Install Dropbox

and/or

Install Copy, which is similar to Dropbox. Slower, but you get more storage for
free. I‚Äôve been using it for a while and I like it. (I actually use both.)

Cleanup

Some people like to clean up after themselves. I tend not to, but I know I
should. These commands will get rid of some of the chaff you may have created
while messing around with your system.


echo "Cleaning Up" &&
sudo apt-get -f install &&
sudo apt-get autoremove &&
sudo apt-get -y autoclean &&
sudo apt-get -y clean

So, you totally screwed up your installation, what do you do now?

Not everything you broke above can be undone easily, but you can reset some of
it. Use the following commands. Then see what happens. Good luck. Did I mention
that you are totally on your own here and I take no responsibility for anything
that goes wrong?


sudo apt-get install dconf-tools
dconf reset -f /org/compiz/
setsid unity
unity --reset-icons

Keywords: Installing Linux, Ubuntu 14.10, Ubuntu Utopic Unicorn
(9)
More >>

Comments

 1. #1 What to do after installing Ubuntu 13.10? ‚Äì Greg Laden's Blog
    October 24, 2014

    [‚Ä¶] NOTE: This may not be the blog post you are looking for. If you have
    installed Ubuntu 14.10 and want to tweak that, GO HERE. [‚Ä¶]

 2. #2 Brainstorms [b59d43]
    October 24, 2014

    Rather than ‚Äúsudo apt-get upgrade‚Äù you‚Äôre better off to always use ‚Äúsudo
    apt-get dist-upgrade‚Äù instead.

    This form ‚Äúintelligently handles changing dependencies with new versions of
    packages‚Äù so that things get updated correctly (i.e., as you expect them
    to).

 3. #3 Greg Laden [HumanE]
    October 24, 2014

    Excellent suggestion. From the man page:

    ‚ÄúIn addition to performing the function of upgrade, this option also
    intelligently handles changing dependencies with new versions of packages;
    apt-get has a ‚Äúsmart‚Äù conflict resolution system, and it will attempt to
    upgrade the most important packages at the expense of less important ones,
    if necessary.‚Äù

 4. #4 Charles Sullivan [1038a4]
    October 25, 2014

    I thought Gnome.

 5. #5 Marcel [4c3e8b]
    October 25, 2014

    Actually I expected an uninstall of UBUNTU and an install of slackware and
    eight more tips to get along merrily with it

 6. #6 Greg Laden [HumanE]
    October 25, 2014

    Charles, you would want to install Ubuntu with Gnome rather than Unity for
    that to really work. Or some entirely different distro. I‚Äôve got one
    machine with Debian Wheezy with Gnome 3.0 and it is OK.

 7. #7 Links 25/10/2014: KDE Mockups, Update on GNOME Outreach Program for
    Women | Techrights
    October 25, 2014

    [‚Ä¶] 10+ Things To Do After Installing Ubuntu 14.10 Utopic Unicorn [‚Ä¶]

 8. #8 John Beast [bc196f]
    October 26, 2014

    Is this updated from version 14.04? I tried the ‚Äfix ubuntu‚Äô thing and it
    said it was no longer necessary.

 9. #9 Greg Laden [HumanE]
    October 26, 2014

    John, they should be turned off by default in a Unicorn.
