filename: ufw_block-ip-address_20230808.txt
https://tecadmin.net/ufw-block-ip-address/

How to Block an IP Address in Linux using UFW
August 5, 2023

   The Linux operating system is renowned for its flexibility, robustness, and security. One of the
   important aspects of maintaining a secure Linux system involves controlling inbound and outbound
   network traffic. This is typically achieved through the use of a firewall. In Linux, one of the
   easiest and most popular firewalls is UFW - short for Uncomplicated Firewall.

   In this article, we will focus on how to block specific IP addresses using the UFW in Linux. This is
   a very practical skill for Linux system administrators who want to maintain secure and stable
   systems.

Understanding UFW
   Before we delve into the steps on how to block an IP address, it is important to have a basic
   understanding of UFW. As stated earlier, UFW stands for Uncomplicated Firewall, and it is an
   interface to iptables, which is the actual firewall built into the Linux kernel.

   UFW simplifies the process of configuring iptables by providing a more user-friendly way to create,
   maintain, and display firewall rules. You don't need to know how iptables works to be able to use UFW
   effectively.

Installing UFW
   UFW comes pre-installed with most Linux distributions. However, if it is not present in your
   distribution, you can install it using the package manager specific to your distribution. For
   instance, on Ubuntu or any other Debian-based system, you can install it using the following
   commands:
$> sudo apt-get update
$> sudo apt-get install ufw

   For Fedora, CentOS, or any other RedHat-based systems, use:
$> sudo dnf install ufw

Enable UFW
   To enable UFW, you can use the following command:
$> sudo ufw enable

   This command will start the firewall immediately, and also ensure that the firewall is started at
   system boot. You can check the status of the firewall with:
$> sudo ufw status

Blocking an IP Address
   To block an IP address using UFW, you use the deny command followed by the IP address you wish to
   block. Let's say you want to block the IP address 192.168.1.100. You can do this with the following
   command:
$> sudo ufw deny from 192.168.1.100

   This command will block all incoming traffic from the IP address 192.168.1.100.

   If you want to block a specific port for the IP address, say port 22 (SSH), you can do so by
   modifying the command as follows:
$> sudo ufw deny from 192.168.1.100 to any port 22

   This command will block all incoming traffic on port 22 from the IP address 192.168.1.100.

   After adding the rules, you can check that they have been added successfully with:
$> sudo ufw status

Conclusion
   UFW provides a simple and user-friendly way to manage firewall rules in Linux. In this article, we
   discussed how to block a specific IP address using UFW. By learning how to use UFW, you can improve
   the security of your Linux systems by controlling which traffic is allowed and which is blocked.

   Please note, blocking an IP address should be done with caution. Always ensure that you are not
   blocking essential services or IP addresses that you may need for your system or network operations.
   Always review your UFW rules and monitor your system's behavior after implementing any changes.


---

