filename: whois-command-20260527.txt
https://linuxize.com/post/whois-command-in-linux/

whois Command in Linux: Query Domain Registration Info
May 25, 2026

Querying domain registration with the whois command in Linux
When you need to know who owns a domain, when it expires, which registrar handles it, or which organization
holds a particular IP block, the whois command is the fastest route. It queries the registry databases
that record this information and returns a plain-text response you can scan in a terminal. The output
format varies by registry, but the questions you can answer are consistent: registrar, name servers,
registration and expiry dates, and contact info (where privacy rules allow).

This guide explains how to use whois in Linux to look up domains, IP addresses, and AS numbers, how to
target a specific server, and how to parse the output for the fields you actually care about.

The general form is:
whois [OPTIONS] OBJECT

OBJECT is the domain, IP address, or AS number you want information about. With no options, whois picks
the right registry automatically based on the type of query.
Install whois

whois is not always installed by default. On Ubuntu, Debian, and Derivatives:
$> sudo apt update
$> sudo apt install whois

On Fedora, RHEL, and Derivatives:
$> sudo dnf install whois

Confirm it is in place:
$> whois --version

output
Version 5.6.6.

The Debian-family whois is an actively maintained client with built-in routing logic that knows which
registry to ask for each TLD.

Look Up a Domain
The most common use is checking a domain:
$> whois example.com

output

   Domain Name: EXAMPLE.COM
   Registry Domain ID: 2336799_DOMAIN_COM-VRSN
   Registrar WHOIS Server: whois.iana.org
   Registrar URL: http://res-dom.iana.org
   Updated Date: 2026-01-16T18:26:50Z
   Creation Date: 1995-08-14T04:00:00Z
   Registry Expiry Date: 2026-08-13T04:00:00Z
   Registrar: RESERVED-Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
   Registrar IANA ID: 376
   Name Server: ELLIOTT.NS.CLOUDFLARE.COM
   Name Server: HERA.NS.CLOUDFLARE.COM
   DNSSEC: signedDelegation
   ...

The fields that matter most for everyday questions are:

    Registrar, the company managing the registration.
    Creation Date and Registry Expiry Date, which tell you how old the domain is and when it needs renewing.
    Name Server, which lists the DNS servers authoritative for the domain.
    DNSSEC, which shows whether the domain is cryptographically signed.

For ccTLDs (.de, .uk, .jp), the format differs because each country runs its own registry. The information
is similar; the field names and order change.

Look Up an IP Address
whois on an IP returns the network allocation, not the domain:
$> whois 93.184.216.34

output

inetnum:        93.184.216.0 - 93.184.216.255
netname:        EDGECAST-NETBLK-03
descr:          NETBLK-03-EU-93-184-216-0-24
country:        EU
admin-c:        DS7892-RIPE
tech-c:         DS7892-RIPE
status:         ASSIGNED PA
...

This kind of query is the right tool for "who owns this IP that has been hitting my server"
investigations. The output names the network block, maintainer, and abuse contact details when the
registry publishes them.

Look Up an AS Number
Pass an autonomous system number with the AS prefix:
$> whois AS15169

output

ASNumber:       15169
ASName:         GOOGLE
ASHandle:       AS15169
RegDate:        2000-03-30
Updated:        2012-02-24
Ref:            https://rdap.arin.net/registry/autnum/15169

AS lookups are useful when you trace a route with mtr or traceroute and want to know which network each
hop belongs to.

Pick a Specific WHOIS Server
The default routing finds the right server for most TLDs, but you can force a query against a specific
server with -h:
$> whois -h whois.arin.net 8.8.8.8

The flag is the right tool for two situations: when the default routing picks the wrong upstream (rare
but happens for some legacy TLDs), and when you want to compare answers between regional registries
(ARIN, RIPE, APNIC, AFRINIC, LACNIC).
Limit the Recursion

Most modern whois clients follow a referral chain: query IANA, follow the pointer to the TLD registry,
follow the pointer to the registrar, and return the most specific answer. To stop registry-to-registrar
recursion, pass --no-recursion:
$> whois --no-recursion example.com

The flag is most useful when you specifically want the registry data and not the registrar´s slightly
different format.

The -H option has a different purpose. It hides legal disclaimers from the output, which can make short
lookups easier to read:
$> whois -H example.com

Filter the Output
Real whois responses are dozens of lines long with legal disclaimers and template text. To extract one
field, pipe through grep:
$> whois example.com | grep -E "Registrar:|Expiry Date:"

output

   Registry Expiry Date: 2026-08-13T04:00:00Z
   Registrar: RESERVED-Internet Assigned Numbers Authority

For a name-server list:
$> whois example.com | awk '/Name Server:/ {print $NF}'

output

ELLIOTT.NS.CLOUDFLARE.COM
HERA.NS.CLOUDFLARE.COM

These short patterns work for monitoring scripts that watch for domain expirations or DNSSEC status changes.

Check Domain Availability
If the domain is not registered, the response says so explicitly. The exact wording depends on the registry:
$> whois never-existed-domain-xyzzy.com

output

No match for domain "NEVER-EXISTED-DOMAIN-XYZZY.COM".

Some registries (notably .io, .co, and several ccTLDs) return an empty or near-empty response for
unregistered domains. Two heuristics that work in scripts:

    For .com/.net/.org, grep for No match for or Domain Name: in the output.
    For ccTLDs, grep for Domain not found or check whether the registration fields exist.

Rate Limits and Etiquette
Registries rate-limit whois queries. Hammering them with a script is the fastest way to get blocked. If
you query many domains, add a sleep between calls and cache the result locally. For bulk lookups, use
the registry´s RDAP service directly or pay for a commercial WHOIS API.

A simple polite pattern:
while IFS= read -r domain; do
	whois "$domain"
	sleep 2
done < domains.txt

Two seconds between queries is a sane starting point; raise it if you see throttling responses.

Privacy and Redacted Output
Since GDPR took effect, most TLDs redact personal contact information for individual registrants. The
response usually contains placeholders like REDACTED FOR PRIVACY or Data Protected, Not Disclosed. For
organizations and legal entities, the contact information often stays visible.

This is not a defect in whois; the underlying registry data is simply less detailed than it used to be. For
account-takeover prevention and abuse handling, focus on the registrar field and the abuse contact email,
which remain published.

Quick Reference
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Task                                    Command
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Look up a domain                        whois example.com
Look up an IP address                   whois 93.184.216.34
Look up an AS number                    whois AS15169
Query a specific server                 whois -h whois.arin.net 8.8.8.8
Stop registry-to-registrar recursion    whois --no-recursion example.com
Hide legal disclaimers                  whois -H example.com
Extract registrar and expiry fields     whois example.com | grep -E "Registrar:|Expiry Date:"
List name servers                       whois example.com | awk '/Name Server:/ {print $NF}'
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Troubleshooting
whois: command not found
Install the package: sudo apt install whois on Ubuntu, Debian, and Derivatives, or sudo dnf install
whois on Fedora, RHEL, and Derivatives. The package is small and adds no significant dependencies.

Output says "fgets: Connection reset by peer"
The registry rate-limited or blocked your IP. Wait a few minutes and retry, slow your script down,
or query through a different network.

Response is in a different language or alphabet
Some ccTLD registries return data in the local language. Look for the English section (usually further
down), or pipe through iconv if the encoding makes the response unreadable in your terminal.

FAQ
What is the difference between WHOIS and RDAP?
RDAP (Registration Data Access Protocol) is the modern replacement for WHOIS. It returns structured JSON
instead of free-text and supports authentication and access controls. Most registries now serve both,
and RDAP is usually the better choice for scripts that need predictable fields.

Why does the data for the same domain look different between two whois runs?
Different clients and servers can follow the referral chain differently. One response may come from the
registry, while another may include data from the registrar´s WHOIS server. Use --no-recursion when
you want to stop at the registry answer.

Can I run my own WHOIS server?
Yes, but only registrars and registries have authoritative data. Self-hosted WHOIS servers are useful
for internal directories (IP allocation in a large network), not for public domain lookups.

Conclusion
whois is the answer to "who owns this", whether the "this" is a domain, an IP, or an AS number. The
output is plain text, the flags are short, and a handful of grep/awk patterns turn it into a script-friendly
data source. For bulk work, slow the queries down and respect the rate limits the registries publish.


---

