filename: bash-manual-some-michellaneus-commands-20260907.txt
https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/html_node/Miscellaneous-Commands.html

8.4.8 Some Miscellaneous Commands

re-read-init-file (C-x C-r)
    Read in the contents of the inputrc file, and incorporate any bindings or variable assignments found
    there.

abort (C-g)
    Abort the current editing command and ring the terminal´s bell (subject to the setting of bell-style).

do-lowercase-version (M-A, M-B, M-x, ...)
    If the metafied character x is upper case, run the command that is bound to the corresponding metafied
    lower case character. The behavior is undefined if x is already lower case.

prefix-meta (ESC)
    Metafy the next character typed. Typing 'ESC f' is equivalent to typing M-f.

undo (C-_ or C-x C-u)
    Incremental undo, separately remembered for each line.

revert-line (M-r)
    Undo all changes made to this line. This is like executing the undo command enough times to get back to
    the initial state.

tilde-expand (M-&)
    Perform tilde expansion on the current word.

set-mark (C-@)
    Set the mark to the point. If a numeric argument is supplied, set the mark to that position.

exchange-point-and-mark (C-x C-x)
    Swap the point with the mark. Set the current cursor position to the saved position, then set the mark to
    the old cursor position.

character-search (C-])
    Read a character and move point to the next occurrence of that character. A negative argument searches for
    previous occurrences.

character-search-backward (M-C-])
    Read a character and move point to the previous occurrence of that character. A negative argument searches
    for subsequent occurrences.

skip-csi-sequence ()
    Read enough characters to consume a multi-key sequence such as those defined for keys like Home and End.
    CSI sequences begin with a Control Sequence Indicator (CSI), usually ESC [. If this sequence is bound to
    "\e[", keys producing CSI sequences have no effect unless explicitly bound to a Readline command, instead
    of inserting stray characters into the editing buffer. This is unbound by default, but usually bound to
    ESC [.

insert-comment (M-#)
    Without a numeric argument, insert the value of the comment-begin variable at the beginning of the current
    line. If a numeric argument is supplied, this command acts as a toggle: if the characters at the beginning
    of the line do not match the value of comment-begin, insert the value; otherwise delete the characters in
    comment-begin from the beginning of the line. In either case, the line is accepted as if a newline had
    been typed. The default value of comment-begin causes this command to make the current line a shell
    comment. If a numeric argument causes the comment character to be removed, the line will be executed by
    the shell.

dump-functions ()
    Print all of the functions and their key bindings to the Readline output stream. If a numeric argument is
    supplied, the output is formatted in such a way that it can be made part of an inputrc file. This command
    is unbound by default.

dump-variables ()
    Print all of the settable variables and their values to the Readline output stream. If a numeric argument
    is supplied, the output is formatted in such a way that it can be made part of an inputrc file. This
    command is unbound by default.

dump-macros ()
    Print all of the Readline key sequences bound to macros and the strings they output to the Readline output
    stream. If a numeric argument is supplied, the output is formatted in such a way that it can be made part
    of an inputrc file. This command is unbound by default.

execute-named-command (M-x)
    Read a bindable Readline command name from the input and execute the function to which it´s bound, as if
    the key sequence to which it was bound appeared in the input. If this function is supplied with a numeric
    argument, it passes that argument to the function it executes.

spell-correct-word (C-x s)
    Perform spelling correction on the current word, treating it as a directory or filename, in the same way
    as the cdspell shell option. Word boundaries are the same as those used by shell-forward-word.

glob-complete-word (M-g)
    Treat the word before point as a pattern for pathname expansion, with an asterisk implicitly appended,
    then use the pattern to generate a list of matching file names for possible completions.

glob-expand-word (C-x *)
    Treat the word before point as a pattern for pathname expansion, and insert the list of matching file
    names, replacing the word. If a numeric argument is supplied, append a '*' before pathname expansion.

glob-list-expansions (C-x g)
    Display the list of expansions that would have been generated by glob-expand-word, and redisplay the line.
    If a numeric argument is supplied, append a '*' before pathname expansion.

shell-expand-line (M-C-e)
    Expand the line by performing shell word expansions. This performs alias and history expansion, $'string'
    and $"string" quoting, tilde expansion, parameter and variable expansion, arithmetic expansion, command
    and process substitution, word splitting, and quote removal. An explicit argument suppresses command and
    process substitution.

history-expand-line (M-^)
    Perform history expansion on the current line.

magic-space ()
    Perform history expansion on the current line and insert a space (see History Expansion).

alias-expand-line ()
    Perform alias expansion on the current line (see Aliases).

history-and-alias-expand-line ()
    Perform history and alias expansion on the current line.

insert-last-argument (M-. or M-_)
    A synonym for yank-last-arg.

edit-and-execute-command (C-x C-e)
    Invoke an editor on the current command line, and execute the result as shell commands. Bash attempts to
    invoke $VISUAL, $EDITOR, and emacs as the editor, in that order.

display-shell-version (C-x C-v)
    Display version information about the current instance of Bash.


---

