filename: ptn_publishing-your-own-python-package_20210330.txt
https://towardsdatascience.com/publishing-your-own-python-package-3762f0d268ec

Publishing your own Python package
Aug 12, 2019

A practical guide to packaging Python code
   Say you have a nice piece of Python code; a couple of small related functions, or perhaps even a
   medium-sized module with a few hundred lines of code. And say that you end up using that piece of
   code time and again; maybe you keep copying it into different projects or repositories, or you keep
   importing it from some dedicated utility-code folder you've set up in a specific path.

   It's natural - we all keep accumulating these small personal tools as we code, and Python probably
   enables and encourages this more than the average programming language - and it feels nice to have
   those pieces of code.

   But wouldn't it be nice if you could easily import that one small tool you developed without copying
   it around, and to maintain one updated version of it? To have it available in different environments,
   machines and contexts without depending on a specific file or path? To perhaps even be able to
   version it and have code using it reflect that dependency clearly? And wouldn't it be even nicer if
   other people could use it too?

   Yes. Yes it would.

   The concept is not new, of course. It's why we have modules, packages and libraries in programming
   languages generally, and why we have those in Python specifically. It is part of what drives the
   phenomenal power, usability and popularity of Python; we can all get the amazing power of
   beautifulSoup's html parsing or pandas' dataframe processing with a simple pip install and import.

   The cool part is that Python makes it easy for everybody to write and publish their own pieces of
   code as packages on PyPI - the official Python package index - and make them as easily available
   as sklearn, requests or delorean (all extremely useful and popular Python packages). And you
   definitely should, since:
	 * It's fun to have other people use your code, even if it's only a handful; it's something cool to
	   share and showcase at work, community events or on a job interview.
	 * It makes your code better by forcing you to organize and document it, and by exposing it to peer
	   review.
	 * Finally, it benefits the community by contributing some missing functionality. You'll be
	   surprised to find how many people might find your efficient serialization of HTTP headers to JSON
	   or that decorator you created for easy validation of input MongoDB query documents useful.

   Now that I've hopefully convinced you to blow the dust off that cool old Python module you have lying
   around and make it into a small Python package, let's get started.
   Figure 1: Python dust 🐍

   In the following post I'll try to walk you through the minimal process I have settled on for
   packaging Python code, building on my experience from publishing a few of small packages (e.g.
   pdpipe, skift and cachier) to the global PyPI server and a couple dozen more on private
   PyPI servers of the couple of start-ups I've data-scienced in. I'm sure it's not perfect,
   but it's what I know, so it'll have to do.

Step 1: It's all in the name
   Let's start by choosing a name for your package. In my opinion, a good name is short enough that it's
   easy to type casually after a pip install or an import declaration (although we do have
   autocompletion these days), but informative enough that people can understand, or at least remember
   after installing the package, what it's about.

   requests, dealing with HTTP requests, delorean, dealing with date and time, and sklearn, offering a
   machine learning framework, are all good examples. I tried to follow that example when choosing a
   name for my pandas pipelines package (pdpipe, which builds on the fact that pandas is often
   imported under the shorter alias of pd) and my caching package (cachier).

   To be honest, though, that is the exception rather than the rule. Popular Python packages have names
   like pandas, keras, django, boto, jinja, flask and pytorch, and yet we all remember their names, so
   you can also work with any short and pronounceable name (for example, even though skift is a nice
   acronym for "SciKIt-learn wrappers for FastText", I mainly cared about pronounceability). It is also
   a good idea to make sure it works well all lowercased.

   For the sake of this post, let's say you went with chocobo.

Step 2: The basic package structure
   Now let's go through several short steps that will leave you with a common package structure:
	1. Create a Github repository with the exact name of your package. Don't stylize it or camel-case
	   it. Then, clone it locally.
	2. Create a folder, in that repository, with the exact name of your package; that's the folder that
	   will hold the package's code. This is the norm, and you just have to remember that
	   the outer chocobo folder (in our case) is the repository's folder, while the inner chocobo folder
	   is the package's folder.
	3. Put your module, and any other modules it uses, in that inner chocobo folder. Add an __init__.py
	   file if one is missing.
	4. Import the important objects, usually functions, that users of the package will call directly,
	   from their respective modules into the __init__.py file. These are the functions, classes and
	   variables that will be available under the package namespace. The API of the package, if you
	   will.
	5. Not package-specific, but you really should include a .gitignore file in the repository's root
	   directory. This is an excellent one.

   So we now have a structure into which we can add the different files that make up a package; the
   inner folder will hold the package's code, and the outer one will hold auxiliary packaging files and
   other repository-related files.

   So, let's say that your original module, chocobo.py, look something like this to begin with:
<code>
"""My chocobo cooking script."""

import os

def chocobo_roast(num_guests, hotness_level):
	# amazing python code here
</code>

   Your new repository folder, then, should look something like this:
chocobo/
	chocobo/
		__init__.py
		chocobo.py
	.gitignore

   Where __init__.py looks something like this:
<code>
"""chocobo is a python package for delicious Chocobo recipes."""

from .chocobo import (
	chocobo_roast,
)
</code>

   That means that after we're done users of our state-of-the-art chocobo package will be able to use it
   this way:
<code>
"""I'm a script or a different package using chocobo."""

import chococbo

def my_feast(num_guests):
	snacks = bobbish()
	main_course = chocobo.chocobo_roast(num_guests, 0)
	dressing = szechuan_chicken_mcnugget_sauce()
</code>

   You get the gist.
   Ha ha! Cause I've just attached a bunch of GitHub gists.... Well, moving on!

Step 3: The license
   Releasing your code with some common license is a good idea; While we are talking here about
   releasing your code as open source, you might want to allow reuse of your code while retaining
   copyright, or you might wish to have people extending your code to have to keep that derivative code
   open, and a license can help you do just that very easily.

   For a pet project, where you don't really care what other might do with, the MIT license is
   probably a great idea, but you can head on to choosealicense.com for some excellent advice on the
   subject by GitHub and the open source community.

   Whatever license you choose, it is better than not choosing a license at all. Releasing code without
   a license is tantamount to not releasing it at all in many cases; if you don't explicitly wave your
   rights to the code, most companies will not risk the possible legal implications of using it, and so
   many of its potential users will look at other options.

   After choosing a license, create a LICENSE file in your repository (no file extension is needed), and
   fill it with the exact text of the chosen license.

Step 4: The setup file
   We will now create the basic file Python packaging tools - in our case setuptools - rely on;
   setup.py.setup.py contains the actual instructions used when building and distributing the package.

   Here's a template you can start with (don't worry, we'll go over everything):
<code>
"""Setup for the chocobo package."""

import setuptools


with open('README.md') as f:
	README = f.read()

setuptools.setup(
	author="Shay Palachy",
	author_email="shay.palachy@gmail.com",
	name='chocobo',
	license="MIT",
	description='chocobo is a python package for delicious chocobo recipes.',
	version='v0.0.3',
	long_description=README,
	url='https://github.com/shaypal5/chocobo',
	packages=setuptools.find_packages(),
	python_requires=">=3.5",
	install_requires=['requests'],
	classifiers=[
		# Trove classifiers
		# (https://pypi.python.org/pypi?%3Aaction=list_classifiers)
		'Development Status :: 4 - Beta',
		'License :: OSI Approved :: MIT License',
		'Programming Language :: Python',
		'Programming Language :: Python :: 3.5',
		'Programming Language :: Python :: 3.6',
		'Topic :: Software Development :: Libraries',
		'Topic :: Software Development :: Libraries :: Python Modules',
		'Intended Audience :: Developers',
	],
)
</code>

   So, we start by importing setuptools. It is a very useful package meant to facilitate the easy
   distribution of Python packages, and even though it is not included in the standard library (unlike
   its less powerful alternative, distutils) it is the de facto standard for Python package distribution
   today and what you should be using. We are only going to use two functions from the setuptools
   package: setup and find_pacakges.

   After importing setuptools and before calling the setup() function, we'll just read the content of
   our README.md file into a convenient global variable, README.

   Now, all that's left is to call the setuptools.setup() function with the following arguments:
	 * author: Just provide your name.
	 * author_email: Your email.
	 * name: The package name. "chocobo", in this case.
	 * license: The string "MIT", in this case, or the name of any other license you chose.
	 * description: A short, one line description of your package. For example, here: "chocobo is a
	   python package for delicious chocobo recipes".
	 * version: A string denoting the current version of the package. I hope to discuss a slightly more
	   elegant way to handle package versioning in a future post, but for now you can just start with a
	   number you manually increase whenever you want to release a new version. It is common practice to
	   prefix the version number with the letter v, so v1 is an appropriate version string for your
	   first version, but I suggest you think of v0.0.1 as an equivalent version string and use this
	   format. Again, more on what this means in a later installment.
	 * long_description: The README content goes here. Indeed, it is quite literally a long description
	   of the package. This is the content of the package's page on PyPI (example).
	 * url: A URL leading to the package's homepage. Assuming you don't have a dedicated site, your
	   repository's URL is a good target.
	 * packages: Aha, here we use setuptools for the second time! This parameter takes an array of the
	   names of all packages to build and distribute / install (depending on the command called).
	   Technically you can just put ["chocobo"] here, but it is better to generalize and use this
	   setuptools function that can handle more complex package and repository structure. It takes two
	   optional parameters, where and exclude, both of which we ignore here. The result is that where is
	   set to the directory the setup file is located in, and that no sub-directory is excluded, which
	   is good enough for most cases.
	 * python_requires: If your package supports all Python versions, you can discard this parameter.
	   Since this is very much likely not the case, you should choose an appropriate value. Technically,
	   I would not advertise support of a version I do not test against, but for now we can just safely
	   assume that:
	   (1) If you're working with Python 2 you're working with Python 2.7 specifically, and (a) you are
	   a rare and wonderful bird (b) you don't need to support anything but python 2.7, so you can
	   provide this parameter with the ">=2.7" string. Also, please move on to Python 3; the clock
	   is literally ticking.
	   (2) If you're working with Python 3 you're supporting any Python version larger or equal than the
	   version you're using to develop the package. So ">=3.5" should be fine if you're working with
	   Python 3.5.
	 * install_requires: All non-standard-library package dependencies go here. For example, if our
	   chocobo package depends on both the requests package and the pytz package, we'll provide this
	   parameter with the following string array: ["requests", "pytz"].
	 * classifiers: Your package will soon go up on PyPI, along with tens of thousands of other
	   packages. To help categorize and distinguish then, package authors can provide PyPI with a list
	   of trove classifiers to categorize each release, describing who it's for, what systems it can run
	   on, and how mature it is. These standardized classifiers can then be used by community members to
	   find projects based on their desired criteria (although I'm not sure who actually does that 🦆).
	   The list of all possible classifiers can be found here; I suggest you start with these:
	   - "Development Status :: 3 - Alpha"
	   - "License :: OSI Approved :: MIT License"
	   - " Programming Language :: Python"
	   - " Programming Language :: Python :: 3.5"
	   - " Programming Language :: Python :: 3.6"
	   - " Programming Language :: Python :: 3.7"
	   - "Topic :: Software Development :: Libraries"
	   - "Topic :: Software Development :: Libraries :: Python Modules"
	   - "Intended Audience :: Developers"

   Alrighty, then! We're done with that! ☃️
   Figure 2: Ace Ventura after choosing his trove classifiers

Step 5: Building the distribution files
   Python packages are built into build distribution files, which are then uploaded to a server -
   usually the global PyPI server - from which they can be downloaded by everybody.

   I won't go into detail about the different possible distribution formats (you can read more about
   them here and here), but we are going to use the standard approach and build two files: a
   source distribution file- which is basically an archive of the package's code - and a wheel build
   distribution file.

   First, make sure you install the latest versions of setuptools and wheel:
$> python3 -m pip install --user --upgrade setuptools wheel

   Now, to build the distribution files simply run the following command in the root folder of the
   repository, where your setup.py is located:
$> python setup.py sdist bdist_wheel

   What's happening here is that we tell the Python interpreter to run the setup.py Python script, and
   send it two arguments, which order it to build both a source distribution file (the sdist argument)
   and a wheel build distribution file (the bdist_wheel argument).

   Three folders will be created in the calling directory when this command is run: build, dist and
   chocobo.egg-info. All three should be ignored by your .gitignore file. If these directories already
   exist - e.g. from previous runs of this command - it might be a good idea to delete them by running
   rm -rf build dist, as any valid package file under dist will be uploaded.

   The two files we're going to upload are located in the dist folder: chocobo-0.0.3-py-none.any.whl
   (the build distribution; a wheel file) and chocobo-0.0.3.tar.gz (the source distribution; a gzipped
   tar archive). Make sure they were created successfully, and we'll move on to uploading your package!

Step 6: Uploading your package
   All that remains now is to upload you packages to the global PyPI server! To do that, however, you'll
   have to register to the PyPI website. Follow the steps for registration and write down the
   username and password you have chosen.

   If you'll like to test package upload before uploading them to the global PyPI server, you can
   additionally register a user at the test PyPI website.

   Now, the Python package we'll use to upload our package will look for the PyPI username and password
   - to authenticate with the PyPI server - in a text file named .pypirc, commonly placed in your home
   folder. Create it, and populate it as demonstrated below (the testpypi section is optional):
[distutils]
index-servers =
  pypi
  testpypi[pypi]
username: teapot48
password: myPYPIpassword[testpypi]
repository: https://test.pypi.org/legacy/
username: teapot48
password: MYtestPYPIpassword

   We are going to follow the up-to-date and recommended¹ way to upload files to the PyPI server,
   and use twine, a utility for uploading Python packages, and not the old python setup.py upload
   method. Simply run:
$> twine upload dist/*

   If you want to start by testing the upload process with the test PyPI server, just run twine upload -
   repository testpypi dist/*.

   In any case, you should see one progress bar as your .whl file is uploaded, and a second when the
   .tar.gz archive is uploaded, after which the upload will be complete.

   Congratulations! You can now go on and have a look at your brand new Python package page on the
   official PyPI website, for all to see! Here's an example:
   Figure 3: An example for a package page on the PyPI website

   That's it! Your'e done! People everywhere can now run pip install chocobo and celebrate the amazing
   creation that is your Python package! :) ☃️

Final words
   I hope you have found this post useful in understanding how to build and distribute your first Python
   package. If you use it to package some code, please let me know by commenting here or getting in
   touch with me!

   There's also an official - and concise - tutorial for packaging Python projects which can be
   found here. I attempted to improve upon it by adding more details and some personal best practices I
   picked up while building a few small open source Python projects.

   Finally, I hope to touch upon a few other related subjects in some future posts: writing good README
   files, basic testing for Python packages (I wrote a bit about it here) and package versioning.
   Cheers!

Footnotes
	1. The main reason twine is the recommended way to upload packages to PyPI by the Python Packaging
	   Authority (to my understanding) - and the reason why I carry that recommendation forward to this
	   blog post - is that it "securely authenticates you to PyPI over HTTPS using a verified connection
	   regardless of the underlying Python version", which is a very good reason - in my mind - to
	   prefer it and recommend it to beginners. Read more in the appropriate section of the twine
	   documentation.


---

