filename: Quora_How-can-I-quickly-learn-to-master-the-Python-3_20170508.txt
https://www.quora.com/How-can-I-quickly-learn-to-master-the-Python-3-programming-language

   How can I quickly learn to master the Python 3 programming language?

   Forget about mastering python (2 or 3), and focus on mastering the practical application of the
   language that you wish to use it for. You can learn enough to be able to start building things
   “relatively” quickly and extremely cheaply (mostly for free), if you do the following concurrently.
   burn through a few online courses like codeacademy / codeschool / datacamp etc. do some of the more
   advanced youtube tutorials (like sentdex ones etc), download github repos of python projects -
   run,tweak and learn from them. keep stackoverflow open at all times - read / quick-scan all the
   comments for every stack-overflow question you find your self searching for answers on - you’ll learn
   different ways python pros approach solving problems. download anaconda and explore its packages -
   learn how to manage virtual environments - read anaconda docs in full - doesn’t take long. do the
   newboston 100 video pygame youtube tutorial - its fun and you’ll really get your head around the
   building blocks of python. Get used to using GIT early - codeacademy has a free course (many others
   out there). Download Thonny - great light-weight, simple all-in-one python IDE for testing your code
   quickly. Choose a pro IDE (pycharm / pydev on eclipse etc ), and begin familiarising yourself with it
   - don’t worry if they’re overwhelming at first - a few months and you’ll be fine. Do all your dev
   initially using simple IDEs like Thonny, python’s IDLE, or text editors like Notepad++ or Sublime
   Text (both have comprehensive python extensions). If you’re into web-apps, there’s some amazing
   django clone tutes and blog posts out there that are worth doing - like [16]Building Web Applications
   with Django and AngularJS. you can also google search specific python algorithms and you’ll learn a
   lot from them. google things like “calculate distance between 2 coordinates python” and inevitably
   you’ll find yourself on stackoverflow with a code snippet that you can learn from / test / extend /
   integrate into your own projects etc. The best programmers I know are 1. always learning (quickly!)
   2. hyper curious 3. have millions of tabs open. 4. Have at-least 1 large project that they’re working
   on that they really care about at all times. Goodluck!

***
   I appreciate other answers but I’ll take a different approach on this. You are going to to hate the
   answer but I’m going to let it out anyways because is is pure truth. There is no such thing as
   “quickly learn to master” no matter what skill or profession we are talking about. Stay with me and
   take a look at definition of “mastery” first.

   Now with that said, it is not possible to quickly gain comprehensive knowledge in any field no matter
   how easy it may sound to you.

   I have been working with Python for years and still don’t consider myself “Mr. Perfect” and probably
   never will because the day I do that will be the day I kill my learning abilities forever.

   However, that doesn’t mean you can’t master Python at all. It is just that it will take time. A lot
   of time. Now how long it takes totally depends upon you, how much time you are investing in, your
   level of understanding and gazillion of other things.

   My advice will be to forget about “mastering it quickly” and focus on learning aspect and make sure
   you are fully absorbing information. Don’t rush too quickly to get to the destination because that
   won’t allow you to enjoy the journey.

   Hope it all helps.

***
   You are going to hate my answer, but you can’t.

   Python is one of those languages, along with CSS and HTML, that are extremely easy to learn and get
   the job done quickly, but has all of those caveats and cool features that make it damn near
   impossible to master. I have been programming in python for 4–5 years and I would still hesitate to
   call myself a python master. People with less experience call me a master, but I know people who know
   a lot more than I do.

   You can learn Python well enough to learn how to build great applications in a few months. How you
   ask? You are going to hate this answer as well: just write code. Learn by doing. Just get to it.

***
   Hey,bro welcome to the world of python. You are going to face one of the most easiest and useful
   programming language. Buy python is having a lots of features so it takes a lots of time to master
   upon. Actually you need to keep patience and work hard. With you hard labour you will be abable to
   create cool softwares with python, but to completely master python you need time.

***
   Ok, so you want to learn to master a complex and intricate programming language. This is no biggie,
   first you start with-

   Wait. Did you say quickly?

   I've been a student of python myself for many years, and I don't even consider myself a master.
   However, you can read on if you want to know the steps I took to get where I am.

   First, I went through the Codecademy python course. Every once in a while, I stopped, went into
   python, and wrote something. When I learned about functions, I wrote a calculator. When I learned
   about dictionaries, I wrote a virtual phone book. You get the idea.

   After you finish the course, try to make something huge. When you don't know what to do, use Stack
   Overflow or something else to figure it out. Add this to your budding expertise.

   When you're done with that, learn Django, the Web framework built with python. It's very cool and one
   of the most popular reasons to learn python.

   After this, you won't have mastered the language, but you'll be on a path to get there.
