filename: ptn-tests-for-a-pdf-20260806.txt

https://blog.lvmbdv.dev/posts/tests-for-a-pdf/

Tests for a PDF
July 31, 2026

   My CV has a test suite, because the first thing that reads a CV is a parser. Four checks, one ATS
   workaround I measured and couldn´t justify, and one assertion that has never run once.

   My CV has a test suite. This is either reasonable or a symptom.
   The excuse is that I´m not the first reader. An applicant tracking system is, and it wants text.
   Every visual decision in the document (the font, the margins, where the dates sit) is invisible to
   it. The only thing it can see is whatever pdftotext scrapes off the page.

   So the resume is a Typst document, make compiles it into dist/, and make test runs a
   Python script over every PDF it finds. Four checks:
    1. The file starts with the bytes %PDF-.
    2. pdfinfo reports a non-empty Author and Title.
    3. It has at least one page.
    4. pdftotext gets at least 200 characters out of it.

   The first three are cheap paranoia. The fourth is the one I actually wanted. A PDF can be a picture
   of a document. If the text layer is broken or absent the file looks perfect to me and is blank to
   every parser between me and a human, which for a CV is most of the audience. 200 is an arbitrary
   number that separates "there is text in here" from "there is not".
$> make test
Checking 1 PDF(s)...

  dist/resume/Ata Kuyumcu - CV.pdf
         Author: Ata Kuyumcu
         Title:  Ata Kuyumcu
         Pages:  2
         Text:   5054 chars

All 1 PDF(s) OK

   5054 characters. There is text in there.

Writing for the parser
   The tests check the output. The template tries to make the output easy to read in the first place:
   single column, no tables, half-inch margins, tech stacks as comma-separated plain text rather than
   icons. A two-column layout is the classic way to hand a parser your job titles interleaved with your
   dates.

   And this, near the top of the template:

set text(
	font: font,
	size: font-size,
	lang: lang,

	// Disable ligatures so ATS systems do not get confused when parsing fonts.
	ligatures: false,
)

   That comment is the kind of thing you read on resume advice sites. Ligatures turn "ffi" into one
   glyph, the theory goes, and the parser hands the recruiter "oce" instead of "office". I believed it
   enough to write it down. I never checked it.

   So I checked it. Two files, identical except for one boolean:

#set text(font: "Charis SIL", ligatures: true)
Office workflow efficiency. Certified affiliate. Final draft.

   That line is 61 characters. With ligatures on, Typst writes 53 glyphs into the content stream. With
   them off, 61. The ligatures are real and they are doing exactly what the folklore says they do,
   collapsing eight characters into four glyphs.

   Then I extracted both:
$> pdftotext lig-on.pdf -
Office workflow efficiency. Certified affiliate. Final draft.

$> pdftotext lig-off.pdf -
Office workflow efficiency. Certified affiliate. Final draft.

   Identical. Because both PDFs carry a ToUnicode CMap, which is the table that says "glyph 0x0002 means
   the letters f, f, i". Typst writes one either way. pdffonts has been telling me this the whole time
   in a column I never read:

name                       type          encoding    emb sub uni
-------------------------- ------------- ----------- --- --- ---
PYRJVB+CharisSIL           CID TrueType  Identity-H  yes yes yes

   uni yes. The glyphs map back to Unicode.

   I kept the setting anyway, which I want to be honest about rather than dress up. It protects against
   an extractor that ignores ToUnicode, or a producer that doesn´t write one. Both exist. I just can´t
   name the specific ATS that gets this wrong, and neither can any of the pages that gave me the advice.
   That´s the whole problem with this genre: the failure is real in principle, unobservable in practice,
   and the mitigation is free, so everyone does it and nobody measures it. I´m now one of the people who
   measured it and did it anyway.

   It isn´t quite free. Disabling ligatures also kills ---, so every date range in the document goes the
   long way around:

// Cannot just use normal --- ligature because ligatures are disabled for good reasons
start-date + " " + sym.dash.em + " " + end-date

   A defensive setting against a parser I´ve never met, and the cost is that I can´t type an em dash
   normally.

The check that never ran

   While I was in there I found this:

EXPECTED = {
	"dist/resume/main.pdf": {
		"author": "Ata Kuyumcu",
		"title_contains": None,  # just check non-empty
	},
}

relative = str(pdf_path)

if relative in EXPECTED:
	exp = EXPECTED[relative]
	if exp.get("author") and exp["author"] != author:
		fail(pdf_path, f"expected author '{exp['author']}', got '{author}'")

   The build produces dist/resume/Ata Kuyumcu - CV.pdf. The dictionary is keyed on dist/resume/main.pdf,
   which was the filename before I renamed the output so that recruiters would get something better than
   main.pdf in their downloads folder. relative in EXPECTED has been False on every run since.

   I confirmed it the dumb way, by changing the expected author to somebody else and running the suite:
$> sed 's/"author": "Ata Kuyumcu"/"author": "Somebody Else Entirely"/' ...
All 1 PDF(s) OK

   Green. The suite will not tell me if my CV is by Somebody Else Entirely.

   That was the only check in the file that asserted anything about which document this is. The other
   four describe a file. Valid header, some metadata, some pages, some text: a PDF of your CV passes all
   four of mine. The one assertion that knew whose name was supposed to be on it died silently to a
   rename, and the tests kept printing Author: Ata Kuyumcu on the line right above the check that wasn´t
   comparing it to anything.

The font, briefly
   The same shape of bug got me in CI. The templates ask for Charis SIL, the runner never installed
   it, and Typst treats a missing font family as a warning and exits 0. So CI published a perfectly
   valid PDF in the fallback serif for three weeks, and all four checks were delighted with it. The fix
   is a font install plus one line:
pdffonts "dist/resume/Ata Kuyumcu - CV.pdf" | grep -q CharisSIL

   The version is pinned to 6.101 because Charis 7 renames the family to plain "Charis", and Typst
   resolves fonts by family name. A newer, better version of the correct font would produce an identical
   silent fallback.

What this suite is actually for
   Four checks that describe a file, one that describes the document and doesn´t run, one grep for a
   font, and a template full of defensive settings against a reader I have never observed. Put like that
   it´s not a great scoreboard.

   But the 200-character check is still the one I´d keep if I could only keep one, and it´s still the
   one most likely to fire, because "the text layer broke" is a thing that actually happens to PDFs and
   it´s invisible on screen. The rest is me guessing at what a parser wants and occasionally, as with
   the ligatures, being able to prove I guessed wrong and doing it anyway.

   I did fix the author check, though not by correcting the key. Fixing the key would have left the
   shape of the bug in place: a lookup that matches nothing does nothing, quietly, and the next rename
   starts the clock again. It´s now a constant compared against every PDF under dist/, which has no
   lookup to miss.

if author and author != EXPECTED_AUTHOR:
	fail(pdf_path, f"expected author '{EXPECTED_AUTHOR}', got '{author}'")
	ok = False

   The way I know it works is that I poisoned the constant and the suite went red, which is the check I
   should have run on the original.


---

