filename: /c/Users/gregor.redelonghi/Dropbox/ODPRTO/_TXT/3w-linuxjournal-com_analyzing-data-multif_20160816.txt
http://www.linuxjournal.com/content/analyzing-data

Analyzing Data

   Mon, 08/15/2016 - 10:30 — [6]Reuven M. Lerner

   My first Web-related job was in 1995, developing Web applications for a number of properties at Time
   Warner. When I first started there, we had a handful of programmers and managers handling all of the
   tasks. But over time, as happens in all growing companies and organizations, we started to
   specialize. One of the developers took charge of the logfiles—storing them and then performing some
   basic analysis on them.

   Although I recognized that this work was important, it took years for me to realize that in some
   ways, his job was more important to the business than the applications that I was writing. The
   developer who worked on these logfiles, and who analyzed them for our bosses, made it possible to
   know who was using our system, what they were viewing and using, where they came from, and what
   correlations we could find among the different data points provided by the logs. Sure, we were
   providing the content and the applications that brought people to the site, but it was the person
   analyzing the logfiles who was ensuring that our work was paying for itself and meeting our business
   goals.

   During the past decade, I've come to appreciate the need for such analysis even more, as the Web has
   exploded in popularity, as businesses have learned to use such data to increase profitability and as
   data science has become a growing field. We're now drowning in data, and being able to make sense of
   it using analytical tools and libraries is more important than ever.

   In this article, I start an exploration of data science using Python, and how you can take something
   as ordinary as an Apache logfile and extract information from it to understand your visitors better
   and what they do. In upcoming articles, I plan to cover how you can use data science methods to
   analyze this logfile in a number of different ways, gaining insights into the raw data it provides
   and answering questions about your Web application. I'll describe how this analysis also can be
   presented to your managers and clients, providing powerful visualizations of the analysis you've
   performed.

Data Science and Python
   I studied something called "learning sciences" in graduate school. While I was there, we often would
   joke that any discipline that includes the word "science" in its name is probably not a real science.
   Regardless of whether data science is a "real" science, it is a large, important and growing
   field—one that allows businesses to make decisions based on the data they have gathered. The more
   data, and the more intelligently you use that data, the better you'll be able to predict your users'
   and customers' wants and needs.

   Data science has been defined loosely as the intersection of programming and statistics, applied to a
   particular domain. You gather some data and then use statistical methods to answer questions the data
   might be able to answer. A background in statistics can be helpful, not only because it'll show you
   the types of analysis you might want to apply, but also because it gives you a healthy sense of
   skepticism regarding the correlations you find. Did you really discover that your Web site is popular
   only with people in a particular area of the world? Or, did you just advertise it heavily in one part
   of the world, influencing who is more likely to visit?

   You can start a data science project by asking a question, or you can start to explore the data in a
   variety of ways, hoping you will find an interesting correlation. Regardless, data science expects
   you to know a variety of methods from which you can choose one or more that are appropriate for
   answering your questions. You then apply the methods, using statistical tests to determine whether
   your answers are significant—that is, whether they merely could have been random.

   Python, long used by system administrators, Web developers and researchers, is an increasingly
   popular choice among people working in data science. This is the result of several factors coming
   together. First, Python has a famously shallow learning curve, allowing non-programmers to get
   started and do things in a short amount of time.

   Second, Python works easily and cleanly with a variety of data formats and databases. Thus, whether
   your raw data is in a text file, relational database, NoSQL database, CSV file, Excel file or
   something more unusual, the odds are very good that Python will be able to read from it easily and
   quickly.

   Third, a number of libraries for analyzing data in Python, such as NumPy, SciPy and Matplotlib, have
   been under development for many years, providing a terrific balance of usability, expressive power
   and high-efficiency execution. In recent years, the Pandas library has added an even more useful
   layer on top of this.

   Finally, the development of IPython, now known as Jupyter, has been nothing short of revolutionary,
   providing developers and data scientists with the ability to interact with their programs and data
   (as with a traditional REPL), but to do so on a Web page that easily can be shared among
   collaborators or sent via e-mail for off-line usage and analysis. Indeed, I now use the IPython
   Notebook in all of my Python courses. Not only does it provide me with a high-quality way to display
   the live coding demos I do during my classes, but I then can send the document to my students, who
   can replay, modify and better understand what I discussed in class.

Importing Data
   The first step of any data science project is to get the data ready. In the case of wanting to
   analyze Apache logfiles, you might think it's enough just to get the file. However, Pandas—the Python
   library that I'll be using to analyze the data for this example—is like many other data science
   systems (for example, the R language) that expects the data to be in CSV (comma-separated values)
   format. This means you'll need to convert the logfile into a CSV file, in which the fields from the
   Apache log are converted into fields in CSV.

   Performing such a transformation is actually quite straightforward in Python. Here is a sample from
   the Apache logfile from my blog:

122.179.187.119 - - [22/Jan/2016:11:57:26 +0200] "GET
--> /wp-content/uploads/2014/10/3D_book.jpg HTTP/1.1" 200 302222
--> "http://blog.lerner.co.il/turning-postgresql-rows-arrays-array/"
--> "Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like
--> Gecko) Chrome/47.0.2493.0 Safari/537.36"
122.179.187.119 - - [22/Jan/2016:11:57:27 +0200] "POST
--> /wp-admin/admin-ajax.php HTTP/1.1" 200 571
--> "http://blog.lerner.co.il/turning-postgresql-rows-arrays-array/"
--> "Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like
--> Gecko) Chrome/47.0.2493.0 Safari/537.36"
54.193.228.6 - - [22/Jan/2016:11:57:29 +0200] "GET
--> /category/python/feed/ HTTP/1.1" 200 25856 "-" "Digg Feed
--> Fetcher 1.0 (Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_7_1)
--> AppleWebKit/534.48.3 (KHTML, like Gecko) Version/5.1
--> Safari/534.48.3)"




---
http://www.linuxjournal.com/content/analyzing-data?page=0,1

   Each line has the following components:
     * IP address from which the request was made.
     * Two fields (represented with - characters) having to do with authentication.
     * The timestamp.
     * The HTTP request, starting with the HTTP request method (usually GET or POST) and a URL.
     * The result code, in which 200 represents "OK".
     * The number of bytes transferred.
     * The referrer, meaning the URL that the user came from.
     * The way in which the browser identifies itself.

   This information might seem a bit primitive and limited, but you can use it to understand a large
   number of factors better having to do with visitors to your blog. Note that it doesn't include
   information that JavaScript-based analytics packages (for example, Google Analytics) can provide,
   such as session, browser information and cookies. Nevertheless, logfiles can provide you with some
   good basics.

   Two of the first steps of any data science project are 1) importing the data and 2) cleaning the
   data. That's because any data source will have information that's not really useful or relevant for
   your purposes, which will throw off the statistics or add useless bloat to the data you're trying to
   import. Thus, here I'm going to try to read the Apache logfile into Python, removing those lines that
   are irrelevant. Of course, what is deemed to be "irrelevant" is somewhat subjective; I'll get to that
   in just a bit.

   Let's start with a very simple parsing of the Apache logfile. One of the first things Python
   programmers learn is how to iterate over the lines of a file:
infile = 'short-access-log'
for line in open(infile):
    print(line)

   The above will print the file, one line at a time. However, for this example, I'm not interested in
   printing it; rather, I'm interested in turning it into a CSV file. Moreover, I want to remove the
   lines that are less interesting or that provide spurious (junk) data.

   In order to create a CSV file, I'm going to use the csv module that comes with Python. One advantage
   of this module is that it can take any separator; despite the name, I prefer to use tabs between my
   columns, because there's no chance of mixing up tabs with the data I'm passing.

   But, how do you get the data from the logfile into the CSV module? A simple-minded way to deal with
   this would be to break the input string using the str.split method. The good news is that split will
   work, at least to some degree, but the bad news is that it'll parse things far less elegantly than
   you might like. And, you'll end up with all sorts of crazy stuff going on.

   The bottom line is that if you want to read from an Apache logfile, you'll need to figure out the
   logfile format and read it, probably using a regular expression. Or, if you're a bit smarter, you can
   use an existing library that already has implemented the regexp and logic. I searched on PyPI (the
   Python Package Index) and found clfparser, a package that knows how to parse Apache logfiles in
   what's known as the "common logfile format" used by a number of HTTP servers for many years. If the
   variable line contains one line from my Apache logfile, I can do the following:
from clfparser import CLFParser
infilename = 'short-access-log'
for line in open(infilename):
    print CLFParser.logDict(line)

   In this way, I have turned each line of my logfile into a Python dictionary, with each key-value pair
   in the dictionary referencing a different field from my logfile's row.

   Now I can go back to my CSV module and employ the DictWriter class that comes with it. DictWriter, as
   you probably can guess, allows you to output CSV based on a dictionary. All you need to do is declare
   the fields you want, allowing you to ignore some or even to set their order in the resulting CSV
   file. Then you can iterate over your file and create the CSV.

   Here's the code I came up with:
import csv
from clfparser import CLFParser

infilename = 'short-access-log'
outfilename = 'access.csv'

with open(outfilename, 'w') as outfile, open(infilename) as infile:
    fieldnames = ['Referer', 'Useragent', 'b', 'h', 'l', 'r', 's',
    --> 't', 'time', 'timezone', 'u']
    writer = csv.DictWriter(outfile, fieldnames=fieldnames,
    --> delimiter='\t')
    writer.writeheader()

    for line in infile:
        writer.writerow(CLFParser.logDict(line))

   Let's walk through this code, one piece at a time. It's not very complex, but it does pull together a
   number of packages and functionality that provide a great deal of power in a small space:
     * First, I import both the csv module and the CLFParser class from the clfparser module. I'm going
       to be using both of these modules in this program; the first will allow me to output CSV, and the
       second will let me read from the Apache logs.
     * I set the names of the input and output files here, both to clean up the following code a bit and
       to make it easier to reuse this code later.
     * I then use the with statement, which invokes what's known as a "context manager" in Python. The
       basic idea here is that I'm creating two file objects, one for reading (the logfile) and one for
       writing (the CSV file). When the with block ends, both files will be closed, ensuring that no
       data has been left behind or is still in a buffer.
     * Given that I'm going to be using the CSV module's DictWriter, I need to indicate the order in
       which fields will be output. I do this in a list; this list allows allow me to remove or reorder
       fields, should I want to do so.
     * I then create the csv.DictWriter object, telling it that I want to write data to outfile, using
       the field names I just defined and using tab as a delimiter between fields.
     * I then write a header to the file; although this isn't crucial, I recommend that you do so for
       easier debugging later. Besides, all CSV parsers that I know of are able to handle such a thing
       without any issues.
     * Finally, I iterate over the rows of the access log, turning each line into a dictionary and then
       writing that dictionary to the CSV file. Indeed, you could argue that the final line there is the
       entire point of this program; everything up to that point is just a preface.



---
http://www.linuxjournal.com/content/analyzing-data?page=0,2

Cleaning the Data
   You've now seen that you can import the data from another form into a CSV file, which is one of the
   most common formats used in data science. However, as I mentioned previously, one of the key things
   that you also need to do is clean the data; analyzing bogus data will give you bogus results.

   So, what sort of data here needs to be cleaned?

   One obvious candidate is to remove anything that wasn't a real human. Perhaps you're interested in
   finding out what Web crawlers, such as those from Google and Yahoo, are up to. But it's more likely
   that you want to know what humans are doing, which means removing all of those robots.

   Of course, this raises the question of how you can know whether a request is coming from a robot. As
   humans, you can examine the User-agent string and make an educated guess. But given that you're
   trying to remove all of the robots, and that new ones constantly are being added, something automatic
   would be better.

   There's no perfect answer to this, but for the purposes of this article, I decided to use another
   Python module from PyPI, albeit one that's a bit out of date—one known as robot-detection. The idea
   is that you import this module and then use the is_robot function on the Useragent field. If it's a
   robot, is_robot will return True. Here's my revised code:
import csv
from clfparser import CLFParser
from collections import Counter
import robot_detection

infilename = 'medium-access-log.txt'
outfilename = 'access.csv'
robot_count = Counter()

with open(outfilename, 'w') as outfile, open(infilename) as infile:
    fieldnames = ['Referer', 'Useragent', 'b', 'h', 'l', 'r', 's',
    --> 't', 'time', 'timezone', 'u']
    writer = csv.DictWriter(outfile, fieldnames=fieldnames,
    --> delimiter='\t')
    writer.writeheader()

    for line in infile:
        d = CLFParser.logDict(line)
        if robot_detection.is_robot(d['Useragent']):
            robot_count[d['Useragent']] += 1
        else:
            writer.writerow(d)

   The above code is mostly unchanged from the previous version; the two modifications are that I'm now
   using robot_detection to filter out the robots, and I'm using the Python Counter class to keep track
   of how many times each robot is making a request. This alone might be useful information to
   have—perhaps not now, but in the future. For example, from examining the most recent 100,000 requests
   to my blog, I found that there were more than 1,000 requests from the "domain re-animator bot",
   something I hadn't even heard of before.

   Given that I'm currently concentrating on user data, filtering out these bot requests made my data
   more reliable and also a great deal shorter. Out of 100,000 records, only 27,000 were from actual
   humans.

Conclusion
   The first step of any data-analysis project is to import and clean the data. Here, I have taken the
   data and put it into CSV format, filtering out some of the lines that are of less interest. But this
   is just the start of my analysis, not its end. Next month, I'll explain how you can import this data
   into Python's Pandas package and start to analyze the logfile in a number of different ways.

Resources
   Data science is a hot topic, and many people have been writing good books on the subject. I've most
   recently been reading and enjoying an early release of the Python Data Science Handbook by Jake
   VanderPlas, which contains great information on data science as well as its use from within Python.
   Cathy O'Neil and Rachel Schutt's slightly older book Doing Data Science is also excellent,
   approaching problems from a different angle. Both are published by O'Reilly, and both are great
   reads.

   To learn more about the Python tools used in data science, check out the sites for [7]NumPy,
   [8]SciPy, [9]Pandas and [10]IPython. There is a great deal to learn, so be prepared for a deep dive
   and lots of reading.

   Python itself is available [11]here, and the PyPI package index, from which you can download all of
   the packages mentioned in this article, is [12]here.
