filename: 3w-speedupfirefox-com.txt
http://www.speedupfirefox.com/

    SPEED UP FIREFOX

   FireFox is an open source browser available free on the internet. Now updated for FireFox
   10.

   FireFox is a web browser developed by the Mozilla Corporation which describes itself as
   such:
   "Mozilla is not a traditional software company. We are a global community and public
   benefit organization dedicated to improving the Internet experience for people everywhere.
   We work in the open through a highly disciplined, transparent and cooperative process to
   coordinate the development and marketing of Mozilla technologies and products as a
   wholly-owned subsidiary of the nonprofit Mozilla Foundation. The Mozilla Corporation has no
   outside shareholders. The Mozilla Foundation is a California non-profit corporation exempt
   from federal income tax under IRC 501(c)3.
   This unique structure enables Mozilla to financially support and cultivate competitive,
   viable community innovation. The result is great products built by passionate people -- and
   better choices for everyone."
   
   The purpose of this website is to help promote FireFox and to provide tips for speeding it
   up and enhancing the user experience. Many people ask why they should download FireFox when
   their Windows based PC already comes with a web browser, Internet Explorer, installed. Here
   are a few reasons:
     * FireFox is faster and can be modified to be even faster with broadband connections.
     * FireFox is safer. Since it is not integrated into the operating system it is harder for
       malicious code like spyware to attack it.
     * As a backup for troubleshooting in the event Internet Explorer has a problem.

   The latest version of FireFox is 10, once you have installed it or upgraded your version to
   10, here are some ways to speed it up:
   The first thing you will want to do is check for plugins and disable those you do not need.
   Plugins allow 3rd party programs to run within Firefox but can be enabled when called for.
   (Flash is one example of this).
   
   At the top of the Firefox window, click on the Firefox button (Tools menu in Windows XP),
   and then click Add-onsOn the menu bar, click on the Tools menu, and then click Add-onsAt
   the top of the Firefox window, click on the Tools menu, and then click Add-ons. The Add-ons
   Manager tab will openAt the top of the Firefox window, click on the Tools menu, and select
   Add-onsOn the menu bar, click on the Tools menu, and select Add-onsAt the top of the
   Firefox window, click on the Tools menu, and select Add-ons.
   1.The Add-ons window will open.
   2.In the Add-ons Manager tabwindow, select the Plugins panel.
   3.Click on a plugin in the list to select it, then press Disable to disable it.
   4.Repeat for some of the plugins in your list.

   Open Firefox and type 
        about:config 
   in the address bar and press Enter. You will get a
   warning and will have to click the “I’ll be careful I Promise” warning button to reveal a
   long list of preferences used in Firefox.

   To change a preference – if it is an integer (number) or a string (text), double click on
   the preference name and you will be prompted for the new value. If it is a Boolean (true or
   false) value, double click the entry to switch from true to false or vice versa – double
   clicking it again will revert it to its original value.
   To add a preference (if the preference name is not already listed in your about:config
   page) right click on an empty space in the about:config window and choose New followed by
   String, Integer or Boolean depending whether the value of the preference is text (String),
   a number (Integer) or true/false (Boolean)
   
   Changing Preferences
   Change or add the following preferences to the new values shown. If the preference is
   already set to this value then just move on the next. If the preference does not exist you
   should add it:
        browser.display.show_image_placeholders: false
   (This stops the display of placeholders while images are loading to speed up the page.
   Default is True)
        browser.tabs.animate: false
   (Disables all tab animation features to make the tab interface feel quicker. Default is
   True)
        network.prefetch-next: true
   (This allows Firefox to automatically prefetch (load) the contents of pages linked to by
   the page you are viewing making it quicker for you to view the next page if you want to. To
   take advantage of increased speed browsing websites which use prefetch, keep this setting
   at the Default which is True.)
        network.http.max-persistent-connections-per-server: 8
   (Increases the maximum number of persistent connections per server which can help speed up
   loading of multimedia rich sites. Default is 6)
        network.http.pipelining: true
   Can send multiple requests to a server together in order to speed up loading of webpages.
   This is not supported by all servers; some servers may even behave incorrectly if they
   receive pipelined requests. Default is False
        network.http.pipelining.maxrequests: 8
   (Sets a maximum number of multiple requests that can be pipelined to prevent overloading
   the server. Higher values will cause a delay before the first request completes but will
   make the last request complete sooner. Higher values will also cause more of a delay if a
   connection fails. The maximum value is 8. Default is 4)
        network.dns.disableIPv6: true
   (Disables IPv6 DNS lookups to prevent a significant delay with poorly configured IPv6
   servers. Default is False)

   References

   1. http://www.speedupfirefox.com/
   2. http://www.speedupfirefox.com/firefox-add-ons.html
   3. http://www.speedupfirefox.com/firefox-news.html
   4. http://www.moishe.net/
   5. http://secure.hostgator.com/cgi-bin/affiliates/clickthru.cgi?id=moishe
   6. http://www.moishe.net/privacy-policy.html
