filename: 50-essential-linux-applications_20160901.txt
http://www.linuxandubuntu.com/home/50-essential-linux-applications

50 Essential Linux Applications

   25/8/2016

   essential linux applications
   If you’re a refugee from Windows, you may be finding the [21]Linux world slightly confusing,
   wondering how you can get the all same functionality you had in Windows, but still enjoy the freedom
   that Linux offers. Never fear! Linux is not some scary, difficult to use monster that’s only used by
   hackers and programmers, it’s actually becoming more and more user friendly every day.
   As such, you may be wondering what applications you should install. The following is a list of 50
   useful and reasonably popular applications that many Linux users enjoy, in no particular order.
       If you’re using Ubuntu or Mint, most of these applications can be found in the built-in Software
   Center GUI applications, or can be installed via the command line terminal. As you progress in your
   Linux experience, you’ll likely find yourself preferring to use the terminal, but everyone has their
   own preferences so do what works best for you.
   
   # Terminal Command
   sudo apt install [insert package(s)]

1. Thunderbird
   From the guys that brought us Firefox, Thunderbird is Mozilla’s email client. While it technically is
   still maintained and various bug fixes continue to be released, there hasn’t been a major update in
   quite some time. But really, how “updated” does an email client need to be? Can it send and receive
   email? Yes? Okay, then it’s purpose is fulfilled. ​

2. Geary
   The default email client that comes with the GNOME 3 Desktop environment. Distros that use the pure
   GNOME 3 desktop environment (such as Fedora) will likely have this installed by default. ​

3. Evolution
   Not just an email client, it also functions as a complete personal information management suite,
   including useful tools such as Calendar. Its functionality is very similar to Microsoft Outlook, and
   it can actually be connected to a Microsoft Exchange server if desired.

4. Firefox or Chrome
   C’mon, you know what these are. But rather than choose one over the other, you could take the middle
   route and install both! Some Firefox addons are not in Chrome, and vice-versa. And maybe you want to
   keep certain bookmarks and addons separate between two browsers, i.e. one for work and one for play.

5. LibreOffice
   The Linux replacement for Microsoft Office, this can do everything Microsoft Office can do, and you
   don’t have to pay hundreds of dollars for it. Most distros include LibreOffice by default.

6. gscan2pdf
   A simple app for scanning documents to the PDF format, which students may find useful, but is also
   helpful when you need to upload official documents you may have.

7. KeePass
   If you’re getting to the point where you have so many accounts with so many different passwords and
   you just can’t mentally keep track of them all anymore, then KeePass will be immensely useful for
   you. It’s a password manager that will store all of your usernames and passwords in an encrypted
   database. Just make sure you don’t forget the KeePass password!

8. VirtualBox
   If you want to experiment with different Linux distros, or different operating systems in general,
   you can install VirtualBox and run a virtual machine inside of your actual machine. Performance won’t
   be quite as good as a native OS installation, but if your system has enough horsepower you’ll notice
   minimal performance degradation.

9. WizNote
   A Linux alternative to Evernote, OneNote, and other similar note taking applications.

10. gdebi
   If you’re running a Debian-based system (such as Ubuntu or Mint), occasionally you won’t be able to
   find certain software in the official repositories and you’ll have to install a .deb package (or
   [22]install a PPA, if applicable). gdebi allows you to execute .deb packages, which will install that
   particular software (you can think of .deb files as the Ubuntu/Mint/Debian equivalent to .exe files
   in Windows).

11. XDM or uGet
   Download managers. I personally don’t like download managers (with the exception of DownThemAll for
   Firefox, but that’s only used in certain cases), but some people do. In my opinion, browsers’
   built-in download managers are sufficient. But hey, it’s your system, install whatever you like.

12. UFW/GUFW
   The Linux firewall. GUFW is the GUI version of UFW, which is typically run in a command line
   terminal. Super simple to configure and enable/disable, definitely less of a headache than Windows
   Firewall.

13. Gimp
   Linux’s answer to Photoshop. Probably the most popular image editor on Linux.

14. Pinta
   If you don’t need all the bells and whistles of GIMP, Pinta is a Linux alternative to MS Paint.

15. BleachBit
   The Linux equivalent to Windows’ CCleaner, with some extra features such as secure file shredding.
   Linux systems don’t typically need much cleaning in the first place, but when they do, BleachBit is
   handy tool to have.

16. ScudCloud
   An unofficial Linux client for the Slack messaging program (not to be confused with the Slackware
   Linux distro). If your organization communicates primarily on Slack, you’ll want this. Slack itself
   also has a Linux application in Beta that’s currently available for Ubuntu and Fedora.

17. Synaptic
   A package manager, installed by default on many distros but not all. It provides an alternative way
   to install and remove packages. Many advanced users prefer it over using the included Software Center
   applications on many distros.

18. DropBox
   Cloud storage, and they have an official native Linux client! Something that Google Drive has yet to
   deliver on.

19. VLC
   The video player that will play anything, no questions asked. If you’re tired of always having to
   find codecs on Windows, VLC solves that problem for you. It can also play audio files and can even
   function as a podcast manager or “podcatcher”, along with several hidden features that not many
   people know about.

20. Unity Tweak Tool
   For Ubuntu systems, some advanced configuration options aren’t included in a GUI menu by default and
   have to be done via command line terminal. Unity Tweak Tool provides a GUI for these advanced
   configurations, most commonly for GTK and Icon themes. There’s also a GNOME Tweak Tool for GNOME
   desktops.

21. Sublime
   A beautiful text editor, and a favorite among many developers. It’s free to try indefinitely, $70 to
   buy the license, a rarity for Linux applications as the overwhelming majority are free.

22. Atom
   Another beautiful text editor, without the $70 price tag

23. Notepadqq
   ​If you’re a fan of Notepad++ on Windows, you’ll be glad to know that the developer has a Linux port
   called notepadqq. It may not be in your distro’s official repositories, but you can always add a PPA
   or install the package manually.

24. Brackets
   Another text editor. They all basically do the same thing, they just have different sets of bells and
   whistles.

25. Cheese
   Linux’s webcam application. Some video chat apps may require it as a dependency. ​

26. Gparted
   The GUI version to Linux’s command line parted utility. Used for disk management (i.e. formatting and
   partitions).

27. CrashPlan
   ​Backup utility for Linux. Remember, if your data isn’t backed up in at least 2 other places, it
   doesn’t exist.

28. Kodi
   All in one media player, similar to VLC in terms of functionality. Also used to run Steam on Arch
   Linux.

29. Genymotion
   If you develop for Android, you’ll need something to test your code on. Genymotion is an Android
   emulator so that you can test your Android apps without having to actually use an Android device.

30. Tomahawk
   An all-in-one music player that allows you to connect all of your various music accounts (Spotify,
   YouTube, Last.fm, and more) together in one seamless application.

31. GNOME System Monitor
   Part of the GNOME desktop, the system monitor allows you to view information about your system in
   real time, such as CPU usage, RAM usage, temperatures, bandwidth, storage space, and more

32. Conky
   The Linux alternative to Rainmeter on Windows. Generally used for system monitoring, conky will
   display lightweight “skins” on your desktop that function as persistent system monitors (whereas
   tools like GNOME System Monitor will open in their own windows). It’s a bit tricker to configure than
   Rainmeter, but you can download Conky Manager and import pre-made Conky configs. Or you can always
   make your own if you know how to code them.

33. Transmission
   Super basic bittorrent client. Comes installed by default in Ubuntu.

34. qBittorrent
   One of many torrent clients for Linux. They all basically do the same thing, so find one that has a
   UI that you like.

35. Tixati
   Another bittorrent client. Man, there’s a ton of these. They all basically do the same thing,
   download and upload torrents. ​

36. Steam
   Never fear gamers, Steam works on Linux as well as Windows, however that doesn’t mean that every game
   is Linux compatible. Most (if not all) of the Valve releases are Linux compatible, so if you’re a
   Counter Strike or Team Fortress player, you should be able to play on Linux (assuming your graphics
   drivers are set up properly). Many games are Windows only though, so you might have to venture
   outside of your comfort zone to find some new Linux compatible games. You can actually search the
   Steam Store for Linux compatible games. If you have Windows games that you just can’t live without,
   there is still hope...

37. WINE
   Stands for WINE Is Not an Emulator, allows you to run Windows applications on Linux. It’s not
   perfect, many applications and games work flawlessly, but some just won’t no matter how hard you try.
   Your mileage may vary.

38. PlayOnLinux
   ​A “helper” application for WINE, which can make the installation of certain games much easier.

39. VeraCrypt
   The continuation of the now defunct TrueCrypt project, allows you to create encrypted volumes on your
   system. We’ve actually got an article on it [23]somewhere…

40. FileZilla
   Offering both a client and server version, FileZilla is easily the best FTP client available. I’m not
   sure who even uses FTP anymore, but it’s there if you need it. Maybe you have 500GB of files that you
   need to send to someone?

41. Pidgin
   Universal chat client, allows you to connect basically all of your various chat/IM accounts into one
   place (AIM, Yahoo, MSN, IRC, and more).

42. Skype
   The famous video chat application, everyone knows what Skype is. However, be cautious of installing
   it on your system, there are some [24]mysterious security concerns surrounding it. We suggest using
   whatever video chat alternatives you can find.

43. Brasero
   CD/DVD burning application, comes installed by default in Ubuntu. Not many people burn CDs anymore,
   or even use ODDs at all for that matter, but if you still have the need to burn physical disks,
   Brasero will be your best bet.

44. Audacity
   A basic audio editor. It’s not professional studio quality, but if you need to edit some audio for
   your own personal YouTube videos, Audacity is a great tool.

45. Openshot
   A solid video editor for Linux. Similar in functionality to Windows Movie Maker. Like Audacity, it’s
   not professional studio quality, but it’s more than sufficient for the everyday user that likes to
   make YouTube videos. I had some performance issues once I got past the 60-90 min mark, but I’m not
   sure if that was the fault of Openshot or if my hardware just couldn’t keep up.

46. Handbrake
   Desktop recording application, useful for screencasts, LetsPlays, and tutorial videos.

47. RecordMyDesktop
   Same as above, desktop recording application.

48. Kazam
   Another screen recording/screencasting application.

49. winFF
   Video converter, super helpful if you have a video in one format but you need it to be in a different
   format

50. Nmap
   Network mapping tool, allows you to view open ports and other various resources on your network,
   useful if you’re security minded and you want to harden your network as much as possible.
