filename: aircrack-ng_test-your-wifi-password_20170904.txt
https://linuxconfig.org/use-aircrack-ng-to-test-your-wifi-password

Use Aircrack-ng To Test Your WiFi Password

Objective
   Test the security of your WiFi password by attacking it

Distributions
   This will work with any Linux distribution, but it's recommended that you use Kali.

Requirements
   A working Linux distribution with a WiFi adapter and root privileges.

Difficulty
   Easy

Conventions
     * # - requires given command to be executed with root privileges either directly as a root user or
       by use of sudo command
     * $ - given command to be executed as a regular non-privileged user

Introduction
   Most people have terrible passwords, and WiFi is no exception. Your WiFi password is your primary
   line of defense against unwanted access to your network. That access can result in a whole host of
   other nasty things because an attacker can monitor the traffic on your network and even gain direct
   access to your computers.
   The best way to prevent such an intrusion is to use the same tools an attacker would to test the
   security of your WiFi password.

Install Aircrack-ng
   This guide is going to use the Aircrack suite of tools. They're already installed on Kali, so you
   won't have to do anything. If you're on another distro, they're in your repositories.
$ sudo apt install aircrack-ng

Scan For Your Network
   First, find out what the name of your wireless interface is with ip a. Once you have it, you can use
   airmon-ng to create a virtual monitoring interface on it.
$ sudo airmon-ng start wlan0

   The result of the command will give you the name of the new virtual interface. It tends to be mon0.
   Dump the results of the monitor into a terminal, so you can see them.
$ sudo airodump-ng mon0

   You can see a table of data pertaining to wireless networks in your area. You only need information
   about your own network. Look for it, and note the BSSID and the channel that it's on.

Dump The Results To A File
   Next, you're going to log the results of a scan to a file. That capture log will be needed by
   Aircrack to run a brute force attack on the network later. To get your capture, you're going to run
   the same command as before, but you'll specify your BSSID, channel, and the log location.
$ sudo airodump-ng -c 1 --bssid XX:XX:XX:XX:XX:XX -w Documents/logs/wpa-crack mon0

   Fill in your actual information before running the command, and leave it running.

Disconnect A Client
   Open a new terminal. You're going to use this one to disconnect one of the clients on your network.
   Take a look at the lower table in your other window running airodump-ng. It contains the BSSID of
   your network along with the BSSIDs of the clients. Pick one, and use the following command with that
   information.
$ sudo aireplay-ng -0 0 -c CLIENT BSSID -a NETWORK BSSID mon0

   You may need to add the --ignore-negative-one flag to the command. That command will run
   indefinitely, continuously disconnecting that client. In the first line of the airodump-ng window,
   look for a message concerning a handshake to appear at the end of the line. It'll be harder to see if
   you had to run --ignore-negative-one because a message about that will occupy the same space, causing
   the handshake message to flash for a second before being overwritten.
   After only a couple of minutes, you can safely stop the disconnect requests and the dump. You can
   stop sooner if you see a handshake message.

Get A Wordlist
   Brute force attacks run down a wordlist, testing each possibility. So, in order to carry one out,
   you'll need a wordlist to test with. Kali Linux comes with a few already. If you're on a different
   distro, you can find some online, but the best way to get them is from Kali. It's worth loading a
   live CD or a VM just to pull them off.
   On Kali, they're located in /usr/share/wordlists. The one this guide will cover is rockyou.txt, but
   you can use any of the ones there.
   If you really want to be obsessively thorough, you can use [31]Crunch to create your own wordlists.
   Beware, they can be absolutely massive.

Attack!
   Now that you have your wordlist and your capture, you're ready to carry out the attack. For this one,
   you'll be using the actual aircrack-ng command and passing it the wordlist and the capture.
$ sudo aircrack-ng -w rockyou.txt Documents/logs/wpa-crack-01.cap

   It can take a seriously long time to go through this list, so be patient. If you have a more powerful
   desktop, there's nothing wrong with installing Aircrack on it, and transferring both files there.
   When Aircrack finished, it'll let you know if it found the password or not. If it did, it's time to
   change your password.

Closing Thoughts
   Remember this process should only ever be used to test your own security. Using it on someone else's
   network is illegal.
   Always use strong passphrases with as many characters as possible and include special characters and
   numbers. Avoid common dictionary words if possible.
