filename: battery-works-3-ways-can-ruin_20150216.txt
http://www.makeuseof.com/tag/battery-works-3-ways-can-ruin/

How a Battery Works and 3 Ways You Can Ruin It

   [28]Gavin Phillips
   On 26^th January, 2015
   [29]Technology Explained
   [30]Ads by Google
   By [31]Gavin Phillips on 26^th January, 2015 | [32]Technology Explained |  [33]3 Comments

   One of the most useful electronic devices available to us is also one of the most common.
   The modern battery is featured in so many of our favourite technologies that you could
   almost be forgiven for not spending time learning about their workings.

   But the time has now come for you to expand your knowledge base by understanding just
   [34]how the smartphone in your pocket is powered, what are the common battery varieties and
   [35]what you can do to prolong their lifespan.

A Brief History of Batteries

   Alessandro Volta demonstrated the first functioning electromagnetic battery in 1800. His
   stack of copper and zinc plates separated by brine-soaked paper discs produced a steady
   voltage for a ‘reasonable’ amount of time. This was known as a voltaic pile and was the
   precursor for a generation of battery-powered experimentation.

   Voltaic Pile

   In 1836, John Frederic Daniell standardised the battery’s design. A copper pot filled with
   copper sulphate solution immersed in an unglazed earthenware container filled with
   sulphuric acid and a zinc electrode became the de-facto battery standard, featuring across
   countless electrical telegraph networks.

   Fast forward to Oxford University, 1979. John Goodenough and Koichi Mizushima demonstrated
   a working rechargeable cell with a 4 volt range that used lithium cobalt oxide as the
   positive electrode and lithium metal as the negative. The precursor of the lithium cell as
   we know it was born – but was only commercialised 1991 by Sony and Asahi Kasei in their
   portable electronic devices.
   [36]Ads by Google

What Is A Modern Battery?

   We use the term modern battery to describe the electrochemical cells that power our
   portable technology devices. Batteries fall into two common categories:
     * Single-use: disposable batteries with electrodes that are irreversibly altered during
       usage.
     * Rechargeable: reusable batteries with electrodes that are restored by reverse current.

   Most modern portable electronics feature a lithium-based battery, the most common of which
   is the lithium-ion (Li-ion) cell. You may also encounter a lithium-polymer (Li-Po) cell
   which has the same electrochemical makeup and general chemistry as its counterpart, but
   costs more to make and has a lower energy density.

   Li-Po Battery

   Nonetheless, Li-Po batteries are still popular due to their lightweight, flexible designs
   and their improved operating capabilities at higher and lower temperatures, something
   Li-ion can struggle with.

   Li-ion batteries usually contain an intercalated lithium compound such as lithium cobalt
   oxide (LiCoO[2]) as one electrode, graphite for the second and an organic solvent as an
   electrolyte. This compound is used due to its high energy density and slow loss of charge
   when not in use, as well as requiring no [37]memory-cycling to prolong the battery
   lifespan.

   IBM Lithium Ion Battery

   All lithium-based batteries will contain a Pressure Temperature Coefficient. This is a
   failsafe switch or sensor designed to keep the battery from overheating in extreme
   conditions or overuse, a process that usually renders the battery useless by permanently
   damaging the chemical compounds that make the charge/discharge process possible.

The Charging Process

   Lithium-based batteries have become the portable technology battery of choice due to their
   [38]high energy density and rechargeable qualities.

   During the charging process, lithium ions move through the electrolyte from the positive
   lithium cobalt oxide electrode to the negative graphite electrode. When discharging or in
   use, the ions move back through the electrolyte, from negative to positive. This process
   happens at a relatively high voltage – 3.7 volts compared to an alkaline AA battery at 1.5
   volts – which is why lithium-based batteries have become the portable power source of
   choice for many consumer electronics.

   laptop battery

   Lithium-based batteries also feature as part of [39]larger battery packs, such as a laptop
   battery. These battery packs feature a number of lithium-ion cells bound into one larger
   component and will contain a number of additional components:
     * Temperature Sensor: Sensor monitoring temperature inside the pack in an attempt to
       maintain safety and longevity of the cells.
     * Voltage Regulator: Sensor and circuit for monitoring and regulating the output/capacity
       of each cell inside the pack
     * Battery Charge State: Sensor informing operating system of current charge state (e.g.
       47% full)
     * Connector: Pack connector for laptop, brand specific.

   Lithium-based batteries can perform thousands of charge/discharge cycles before the quality
   of the cell begins to truly degrade, but there are several ways that you can ruin your
   battery, potentially putting yourself in danger in the process.

Battery Maintenance

   The positive electrode found in most lithium based batteries, LiCoO[2], can present a
   number of hazards if the cell becomes damaged. Unlike a number of other battery options,
   compromising the flammable, pressurised compound can produce extreme results. To mitigate
   this, lithium-based battery cells are subject to a number of safety tests, many of which
   are more stringent than their acid-based counterparts.

Heat

   There have been a number of instances of lithium-based batteries igniting in extreme heat
   conditions. Batteries under heat duress combined with any additional, unexpected pressure
   or a short-circuit [40]can ‘explode’ leaving a destroyed battery and, more often than not,
   a damaged piece of portable technology.

   Damaged Lithium Ion Battery

   Each lithium-based battery has an inbuilt separator contained within the cell. This
   distinguishes between the positive and negative electrodes during the charge/discharge
   process. If this separator becomes perforated or damaged, there is a chance the electrodes
   could make contact. This causes the battery to experience a rapid gain in heat which can
   lead to an explosion.

   The battery has a venting mechanism to prevent such an occurrence but ultimately, due to
   the nature of the chemical compound being vented, the chance of an explosive reaction still
   remains due to the heat generated by the chemical reaction.

Discharge Ratings

   Lithium-based [41]batteries prefer a partial discharge, rather than ‘deep’ or ‘full’. They
   do not have a charge memory so a partial discharge doesn’t affect future performance.

   Empty Battery

   However, a ‘deep’ discharge i.e. completely depleting the battery, will cause the voltage
   of a lithium-based battery to fall and could result in a permanently damaged battery.

Aging Process

   Lithium-based batteries age. [42]Their maximum lifespan is thought to be between 2-4 years
   depending on the number of charge/discharge cycles experienced. That is not to say you
   should keep track of the number of times you use the battery as that would be rather
   difficult. But putting off using a new battery and leaving it on the shelf will not prolong
   the battery life – the battery will still only last the same 2-4 years.

   It also worth checking when a battery was manufactured when purchasing a new portable tech
   product. If it has been sat redundant in a warehouse for a year, that’s a year of battery
   life already ebbed away. Contact the product manufacturer and ask for a new battery where
   possible.

   There are modern battery management applications that claim to be able to reverse the
   current accepted cell degradation over time, such as ‘[43]batteryOS‘, a product that will
   be launched in February 2015.

Li-Air

   The [44]next generation of lithium batteries will feature lithium-air chemistry, allowing
   for extremely high energy-density in increasingly lightweight designs. Li-Air batteries
   gain an energy-density advantage over their traditional counterparts by utilising abundant
   oxygen to induce current flow, rather than storing the required chemical oxidiser
   internally.

   Battery Energy Density

   Unfortunately, [45]research is still required in a number of key areas before a
   commercially viable Li-Air product will feature in our portable devices.

   Has this helped your understanding of the batteries in your portable devices? Let us know
   what you think below!
