filename: build-your-own-distro-multif_20140606.txt
http://www.linuxuser.co.uk/news/build-your-own-distro-part-one

Build your own distro part one

Discover the different methods available for creating your own customised distro and have
everything working your way in no time

   There a few reasons why you might want to build your own distribution. You might want to
   build a custom install CD to match the policy of your organisation. For example, a GNOME
   desktop with Chrome as the web browser might be the standard desktop where you work. That
   touches on another motivation for wanting to create a customised installer: sometimes the
   creator of the distribution makes a decision that you simply don't like. Canonical's
   decision to switch to its own UI, Unity, ranks amongst its most controversial decisions.
   However, by using some of the methods that we explore here, you could create a distribution
   that is standard Ubuntu, but with a traditional desktop that you are more comfortable with.

   There are other, niche reasons for wanting to build your own distribution. You might need
   to put something small and lightweight together for an older computer. You might need to
   build a live media ISO that you are able to carry around with you and to bring your
   favourite set of tools to bear when you need them.

   The methods of creating a custom distribution are varied, but they can be divided into two
   main categories: you can modify a running distribution and then distribute it, or you can
   modify the installation ISO (called `remixing') so that it installs your modified
   distribution in the way you have specified. We're going to take a look at four approaches.

Remastersys

   Remastersys is a tool that extracts the configuration from a running Ubuntu or Debian
   installation and then turns this into an installable ISO image. This means that you carry
   out the customisation using the standard tools that you normally use, such as the package
   management system and GUI configuration tools. When you have everything set up the way you
   want it, you can clone the system and deploy it. Additionally, you can use Remastersys to
   make a clone of a working system.
   [32]Building the ISO Building the ISO

Fetch Remastersys

   The development status of Remastersys is currently in transition. At time of writing, the
   best policy is to visit the Remastersys website and to cut and paste the repository details
   from there. For example, if you are using Ubuntu 13.10, download the GPG key and add it
   from the command line with:
wget -O - http://www.remastersys.com/ ubuntu/remastersys.gpg.key
sudo apt-key add remastersys.gpg.key

   then add...
deb http://www.remastersys.com/ubuntu precise main

   ...to the end of /etc/apt/sources.lst by invoking a text editor as root.

   Following that, type sudo apt-get install remastersys remastersys-gui in order to install
   Remastersys and its GUI.

Using Remastersys

   When you have the installation set up the way you want it, launch Remastersys by typing
   sudo remastersys-gui. The first option we need to visit is the customisation page which is
   reached by clicking on the Customise button. From here, you can change branding options
   such as the various splash images. From within this page, click on Copy Settings. This
   takes you to a further page on which you can select the user whose settings will be copied
   to /etc/skel/. In other words, these are the settings that will become the defaults for all
   new users on the new system. If you skip this stage, new users will simply have the default
   settings for the distribution.

   Finally, build the installation ISO simply by clicking on the Distribution button on the
   main menu page. The ISO is deposited into the /home/ remastersys/ folder. Use networking to
   transfer the ISO file to the outside of the VM. We usually install Filezilla and transfer
   to a local FTP server. You can now boot the ISO on the target machine and carry out a
   regular Ubuntu installation.

SUSE Studio

   SUSE Studio allows you to build a customised SUSE Linux installation using a web interface.
   Although it's easy to use, that doesn't mean it has compromised on options.

   Initially, you choose a base template such as KDE Desktop or Server. From this point, you
   begin the configuration properly. The first tab is labelled Software, which is where you
   choose software packages with an interface that is categorised and searchable.

Example deployment: Business desktop

   Here we're going to put together an example appliance. In this case, the appliance will be
   a business desktop that based around GNOME. We'll add a few customisations as we go along,
   and we want to finish up with an installable ISO that we can use for deployment.

   Begin by setting up an account on the [33]SUSE Studio website. You do this by following the
   `Sign In Or Create An Account' link on the front page, and it is possible to use one of
   your existing social networking accounts such as Facebook or OpenID if you prefer.
   [34]Add in some custom branding Add in some custom branding

   Once you have an account, click on `Create New Appliance...'. On the next screen, choose
   the GNOME Desktop base template, making sure that you are selecting from the templates that
   relate to the latest version of SUSE Linux. Scroll down to the bottom of the window to
   choose your architecture and then give your appliance a meaningful name. Click OK, and
   after a short delay, we can start honing the appliance to match our own requirements.

Start customising

   As this is a business desktop, let's add LibreOffice to it. To do this, select the Software
   tab and type the word `libre' into the search box. The search is real-time, so you should
   soon be presented with a list of matches. Note that they are sorted by popularity and the
   package called LibreOffice should be at the top of the list. Click the `+add' button to add
   this package. For a big software suite such as LibreOffice, it may take a few moments for
   the interface to register all of the needed dependencies. Add Firefox too. Staying in the
   Software tab for moment, it's worth noting that you are able to add extra repositories and
   even custom RPM packages.

   We'll select the localisation options next. Proceed to the Configuration tab and select the
   General sub-tab. In here, select English (UK) as the language and keyboard layout and
   Europe and United Kingdom as the region and time zone respectively. Note that you could
   also have selected Ask on first boot for any of these options as well.

   We'll leave the network options as they are, but this is where you would disable DHCP and
   specify a static IP address for the workstation, or disable the firewall if you needed to.
   At the bottom of the page, we can see a list of users and groups. It's a good idea to
   change the root password from the default. Now click on `Add new user...' and create a
   standard user who is a member of the Users group.

   Moving to the Personalize sub-tab of the Configuration page, we can now add some custom
   branding. This might fit in well with the policies of your organisation, and it is also
   extremely handy for at-a-glance identification of a desktop within a busy IT environment.

   The Files tab is worth a visit if you need to add custom files to the distribution. You can
   add single files or archives. For example, if you wanted to add a file to the desktop of
   every new user, you should upload it and specify that it should be placed in
   `/etc/skeleton/ Desktop'. If you wanted to place a file within the home directory of the
   user that you have created called John, add it to `/home/john/'.

   As a finishing touch, pop into the Configuration>Desktop page. Tick the box to
   automatically log the user in. Add the command firefox to the Autostart desktop user log-in
   section to automatically start Firefox. Opinions vary, but these options allow the user to
   get straight to work.

Build the ISO

   The options within the Build tab are particularly interesting because they allow you to
   specify the output format of your custom build. This means that you don't necessarily have
   to carry out a full installation in order to use your custom build.

   For example, you can create a virtual machine that will directly boot within a visualiser.
   If you want to work like this, you will probably need to skip back to the Appliance sub-tab
   within the Configuration tab to define the parameters of the VM. Here, you can choose
   options such as allocated memory and set up the LVM partition arrangement. Apart from the
   various VM environments you can directly create, you can also create a traditional ISO
   installer, a hard disk image or a live CD/USB image.

   In order to create a traditional installation ISO, select `Preload ISO (.iso)' in the
   Default format and click on the `Build' icon. This can take a few minutes to complete,
   depending on how large and complicated your custom image is. Although it may take several
   minutes for your image to build, once built, your appliances remain on the site and can be
   downloaded without delay. The final tab, Share, is an intriguing function that allows you
   share your finished appliances with other people.

   Boot the finished ISO as you would any other installation ISO. Confirm that you wish to
   erase all data on the hard disk when prompted.


     * Guy
       Remastersys has ceased development but there is a great alternative in Refracta:
       [57]http://www.ibiblio.org/refracta/, which includes the Refracta linux distro which
       you can easily mod (it is built on Debian) & then write your own iso. Alternatively you
       can use the Refracta tools on your distro of choice.
     * Lance Poore
       All this `standard ubuntu' hype is BS.. Ubuntu has way too much attention and for what?
       The end users of these distros almost always end up having trouble somewhere down the
       line, and get stumped on something like uncommenting a configuration file that is in
       their way.. Then back off to MS / Apple they run (then there are the others that just
       use it for some unknown reason I'd sure like to know myself).. What a mess the whole
       *Buntu flavor / choices is.. Good ol stable slackware is undermined simply because it
       has stuck it its original working methods. Gentoo gets stabbed for taking too long to
       `build' RHEL/Fedora is thought to only be for enterprise setups. When I read this
       article I was hoping to find some actual interesting information on building a distro
       instead I find yet another article on customizing the already over-customized ubuntu
       distros that are out there (as if there isn't enough combinations of the variant
       already available) It is Sad, really it is..
     * Lance Poore
       /me considers forking Remastersys to work with other distros such as Slackware,
       RHEL/FC, Sabayon, Gentoo, Funtoo, etc etc.. Taking a look into the actual source code
       and tinkering.
     * Charlie Whitman
       As the article stated, the tools that work for Ubuntu also work for Debian. If
       anything, Suse is covered more extensively in the article than any other distribution.
     * daz
       why do all linux mags always do this subject every year... and always get the the title
       wrong ?? it should not be "Build your own distro" but remaster someone else's
       distro....
       It would be amazing to really give the building blocks to REALLY build the whole
       "distro" the not so open magic...
     * stampeder
       "Linux From Scratch" is how you build a complete distro of your own from the ground up,
       not using anybody else's distro for parts:
       [58]http://www.linuxfromscratch.org/lfs/download.html



---
http://www.linuxuser.co.uk/tutorials/build-your-own-distro-part-two

Build your own distro part two

Ubuntu minimal installation

   Canonical provides a minimal Ubuntu install CD. It's smaller than the regular installation
   ISO and it installs a minimal version of the distribution. At its most basic, it gives the
   user a command line, network connectivity and not much else. From this bare-bones
   beginning, it's possible to selectively add components while leaving out most of the cruft
   that tends to come with a standard distribution.

   We're going to work from within a virtual machine for safety and convenience. In our case,
   we're going to use Oracle VirtualBox but any of the major virtualisers will work. Once we
   have it set up the way we want it, we can use Remastersys to turn it into an ISO that can
   be distributed. We can then transfer this ISO from within the VM to an FTP server.
   [33]Fetching the Ubuntu MinimalCD ISO file Fetching the Ubuntu MinimalCD ISO file

Example deployment: Minimal Openbox Desktop

   Fetch the installation media from http://tinyurl. com/ygawub and create a new virtual
   machine. 512MB is a sensible minimum when allocating memory, but more memory can also help
   greatly with speeding things up. An 8GB hard disk file should be adequate for most people's
   requirements. It's usually worth allocating as many CPU cores to the VM as you can.

Begin the customisation

   Once you have booted the ISO from within the VM, begin by filling in the localisation
   details using the text mode interface. Next, the installer will attempt to find your
   network using DHCP. Following the network detection phase, fill in a hostname that will be
   used to identify this computer on the network. Once you've done this, select a mirror that
   is geographically close to your location.

   The installer should now begin to download packages. Once the packages have come through
   the network, set up the username for the standard user. You should be able to use common
   sense to ask the question that comes next, regarding your time zone and default user and
   password.

   When prompted, allow the installer to allocate the disk partitioning by selecting the
   `Guided - use entire disk' option. Confirm that you want to write to the disk when
   prompted. The actual layout that you use now isn't important as we will be producing an ISO
   that will carry out the installation of our custom distribution from scratch. Once the
   partitioning has completed, the installer will fetch the packages need for the base
   installation and begin installing them.

Customisation decisions

   When the base installation is complete, you will be presented with the Software selection
   menu. At this point you have to make a decision. If you want to, you can select one or more
   of the provided templates. For example, you could select Kubuntu desktop option and have a
   fairly complete desktop system from the beginning. There are other options to establish a
   LAMP web server or a Mythbuntu media system, and many others. Most of the rest of this
   tutorial assumes that you don't select any of these options so that we can customise
   completely from scratch.

   More downloading and installation follows. Confirm that you want GRUB installed to the MBR
   when asked. This brings us to the end of the initial installation phase. Eject the ISO and
   reboot the VM when prompted.

First reboot

   Upon booting the minimal installation for the first time, you should be prompted for your
   username and password. We can now start to customise the system. Install X.org server and
   Openbox window manager (feel free to substitute another WM/DE if you prefer) by typing sudo
   apt-get install xorg openbox. When this has completed, type startx to test the GUI. Click
   on the backdrop to bring up a menu that will allow you to launch a terminal window.

   Now you can begin customising the system. Make things as comfortable as you like, but
   remember that anything that is installed on this system will end up on the target system.
   sudo apt-get install firefox synaptic lxterminal mousepad lxdm will install and set up the
   Firefox web browser, Synaptic (GUI package manager), LXTerminal (more comprehensive
   terminal application), Mousepad (a GUI text editor) and LXDM (graphical login manager).
   That little lot will add about 30MB to the installation ISO that you will create, and about
   100MB on the hard disk.

   What you actually add is up to you. Apart from adding packages, you can add desktop
   customisations such as changing the backdrop. When you've got things just how you want
   them, create a distribution medium using Remastersys or a disk cloning tool such as
   Clonezilla.

Ubuntu Builder

   Ubuntu Builder is a GUI application that allows you to take the contents of a standard
   Ubuntu installation ISO and modify it to create a new, customised ISO for redistribution.
   It's a fairly simple application, however, and not designed for deep modifications of the
   type that some of the other methods allow.

   Ubuntu Builder is a standalone application that runs on your desktop, and it even runs on
   distributions other than Ubuntu. It works by modifying a standard Ubuntu installation ISO,
   downloading and inserting or removing packages for you.

   Step 01 The installation

   Start by ading the Ubuntu Desktop PPA by typing sudo add-apt-repository ppa:f-
   muriana/ubuntu-builder into a terminal. Now run sudo apt-get update followed by sudo
   apt-get upgrade to update the package lists on the system. Use sudo apt-get install
   ubuntu-builder to carry out the installation.

   Step 02 Launch Ubuntu Builder

   You can now launch Ubuntu Builder by typing sudo ubuntu-builder in the Terminal or by
   clicking on its launcher icon in the launcher menu. At this point you should be able to see
   the basic root interface.

   Step 03 Fetch ISO

   You can fetch the current ISO by clicking on the `Get Ubuntu' button in the main interface.
   However, it's worth mentioning that we actually found manually fetching the latest standard
   install ISO from the Ubuntu website to be more reliable.

   Step 04 Select and unpack the ISO

   Point Ubuntu Builder to the standard installation ISO by clicking on the `Select ISO'
   button. This should invoke the unpack procedure in a Terminal window, enabling us to modify
   the contents of the ISO. Wait for this process to finish.

   Step 05 Add the MATE repository

   Click on the `Edit sources.list' button. This opens a text editor. Cut and paste the
   appropriate repository line (beginning with deb) from the MATE installation guide
   (http://wiki.mate-desktop.org/download).

   Step 06 Select MATE as the desktop environment

   Click on the Select DE/WM button. In the menu, select MATE as the desktop. This should
   invoke a Terminal screen while the packages are replaced. Allow this process to finish.

   Step 07 Create the remixed ISO

   Click on the `Build' button at the top of the main window. This will open a Terminal window
   that displays the progress of the ISO build process. This might take a long time (an hour
   or more) depending on the speed of your machine.

   Step 08 Install the ISO

   Use the installation disk in the same way that you would normally install Ubuntu... and
   that's all it takes! You're now ready to start using your new, customised distribution.
   Enjoy!
