filename: exfat_howto-mount-and-use-an-exfat-drive_20151217.txt
http://www.howtogeek.com/235655/how-to-mount-and-use-an-exfat-drive-on-linux/

How to Mount and Use an exFAT Drive on Linux

The exFAT file system is ideal for flash drives and SD cards. It’s like FAT32, but without the 4 GB
file size limit. You can use exFAT drives on Linux with full read-write support, but you’ll need to
install a few packages first.

Try connecting an exFAT-formatted drive without installing the required software and you’ll often see
“Unable to mount” error message saying “unknown file system type: ‘exfat’.”

How to Install exFAT Support
We performed this process on Ubuntu 14.04, but it’ll be similar on other versions of Ubuntu and other
Linux distributions.

First, open a Terminal window from your applications menu. On Ubuntu and similar Linux distributions,
type the following command and press Enter to install the appropriate packages. You’ll have to enter
your password, too.

sudo apt-get install exfat-fuse exfat-utils

On other Linux distributions, use the appropriate software-installation command or open the graphical
user interface and look for the “exfat-fuse” and “exfat-utils” packages. They may be called
something a bit different — search for “exfat” and you should find them if they’re available in
your Linux distribution’s package repositories.

Mount exFAT Drives Automatically
After you’ve installed the appropriate software, you can just connect an exFAT drive to your computer
and it will be mounted automatically. If it’s already connected, just unplug the drive and plug it back in.

Modern Linux desktop environments are smart enough to automatically mount file systems when you connect
removable devices, and — once you’ve installed the required software for mounting exFAT drives —
they’ll work automatically. You can use them normally without ever pulling up a terminal again, and
you’ll have full read-write support.

Mount exFAT Drives From the Terminal
This should “just work” with modern desktop environments, so the below commands shouldn’t be
necessary. But, if you’re using a Linux distribution or desktop environment that doesn’t automatically
mount file systems for you — or if you’re just using the terminal — you may need to mount the file
system in the old-fashioned way.

This can be done just like you’d mount any other partition, using the “-t exfat” switch to tell
the mount command to mount a file system as exFAT.

To do this, first create a directory that will be the “mount point” for the exFAT file system. The
below command creates a directory at /media/exfat:

sudo mkdir /media/exfat

Next, run the following command to mount the device. In the example below, the device is located at
/dev/sdc1. This is the first partition (1) on the third device (c). If you have a single drive in the
computer and you just connected a USB drive to it, there’s a good chance the exFAT file system will
be /dev/sdb1 instead.

sudo mount -t exfat /dev/sdc1 /media/exfat

You can now access the contents of the drive at the mount point you specified. In the example above,
that’s /media/exfat. To unmount the partition when you’re done with it, just run the following command,
specifying the appropriate device you specified earlier. You can then remove the storage device from
your computer, if you like.

sudo umount /dev/sdc1

The exfat-utils package also contains a “mkfs.exfat” command. You can use this command to format
partitions with the exFAT file system from Linux, if you like. You can also just format them with exFAT
from Windows, Mac, or other devices that support exFAT.
