filename: flatpak_guide_20180601.txt
https://itsfoss.com/flatpak-guide/

Using Flatpak on Ubuntu and Other Linux Distributions [Complete Guide]
May 28, 2018

   Brief: Flatpak is a new universal packaging format from Fedora. Enabling Flatpak will give you access
   to the easy installation of many Linux applications. Here’s how to use Flatpak in Ubuntu and other
   Linux distributions.

   Installing an application in Linux is as easy as opening the Software Center, searching and
   installing it. The applications which are not available in the App Stores can be installed via the
   DEB or RPM packages. Some of them are available via PPAs (for Debian based distributions) and if
   nothing, one can [26]build from the source code.

   There are some limitations though. The App Stores do not generally have the latest release of an
   application, handling dependencies can be tiresome and the PPAs may not always be safe! And, building
   from the source requires some terminal hands-on.

   With several Linux distributions and the package management systems, there was a need of a Universal
   Packaging system that could run an application irrespective of what Linux distribution you are using.
   Canonical thought of it and created [27]Snaps. There is also an independent universal software
   package called [28]AppImage where you download an application and run it without actually installing
   the application.

   Along with Snaps and [29]AppImage, there is another universal package system called Flatpak from
   Fedora. We will see how to install and use Flatpak on most Linux distributions along with its
   advantages.

What is Flatpak?
   Flatpak is basically a framework for the applications on Linux. With the different distributions
   preferring their own package management, Flatpak aims at providing a cross-platform solution with
   other benefits. It makes the work for developers even easier. A single application build can be used
   in almost all the Linux distribution (that support Flatpak) without any modification to the bundle.

Primary advantages of Flatpak
     * Apart from offering a single bundle for different Linux distributions, Flatpak offers integration
       to the Linux desktops making it easier to browse, install and use Flatpak applications, e.g. the
       Gnome Software Center can be used to install a Flatpak.
     * Flatpaks are forward compatible i.e. the same Flatpak app can run on the next releases of a
       distribution without changes.
     * Run-time dependencies are maintained which can be used by the application. Missing ones can be
       added as a part of the application.
     * Though Flatpak provides a centralized service for distribution of applications, it fully supports
       the decentralized distribution of applications.

A. Enable Flatpak support for various Linux distributions
   How to use Flatpak in Ubuntu and other Linux distributions

   Installing Flatpak is a two-step process. The first one is to install Flatpak so and then we have to
   add the Flathub repo from where we can install applications.

Install Flatpak on Ubuntu 18.04 and Linux Mint
   Linux Mint and Ubuntu 18.04 has Flatpak supported by default. However, you can verify it by trying to
   install Flatpak again:
sudo apt install flatpak

Install Flatpak on Debian, Ubuntu 17.10, 16.04, Elementary OS and other Ubuntu based distributions
   Debian based distros can use the official PPA to install Flatpak. Open a terminal and use the
   commands below:
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:alexlarsson/flatpak
sudo apt update
sudo apt install flatpak

Install Flatpak on Red Hat and Fedora based Linux distributions
   Since Flatpak is a project developed by Fedora itself, all recent Fedora releases support Flatpak.
   However, you can still verify it by using the command below:
sudo yum install flatpak

Install Flatpak on openSUSE
   To enable Flatpak support on openSUSE based Linux distributions, use the command below:
sudo zypper install flatpak

Install Flatpak on Arch Linux
   To enable Flatpak support on Arch based Linux distributions, use the command below:
sudo pacman -S flatpak

B. Enable Flatpak application support in Software Center
   Flatpak applications can be completely managed via command line. But not everyone likes using command
   line for installing applications and this is where enabling Flatpak support in GNOME software center
   will be a lifesaver.

   You will need the GNOME software plugin to install a flatpak via GUI. Use the below command to
   install it in Ubuntu based distributions:
sudo apt install gnome-software-plugin-flatpak

   For other distributions, use the regular package installation command to install
   gnome-software-plugin-flatpak. Once installed, restart the Software Center or your machine.

   Now you can download the .flatpakref file from the application developer’s website or from the
   official Flatpak application store, Flathub.

   Navigate to the download folder and double click on the downloaded .flatpakref file. It should open
   the Software Center and will provide the installation option as shown in the picture below:

   You can also right click on the file and Open with Software Install (default) if double click doesn’t
   work.

   Once the installation completes, you can launch it from software center or from the application menu.

C. Using Flatpak commands (for intermediate to experts)
   Now that we have seen how to enable Flatpak support and how to install Flatpak applications, we can
   move forward to see Flatpak commands for complete control over package installation.
   This part of the tutorial is optional and only intended for intermediate to expert users who prefer
   command line over GUI.

Add repositories for installing Flatpak applications
   Flatpak needs to have repository information from where you can find and download applications. It
   would be a good idea to add the Flathub repository so that you get access to a number of Flatpak
   applications.

   To do that, use the following command:
flatpak remote-add --if-not-exists flathub https://flathub.org/repo/flathub.flatpakrepo

Searching Flatpak through terminal
   You can search for available Flatpak applications using the search option in Flatpak command in the
   following manner:
flatpak search <application-name>

   The application name need not to be exact. It will show all possible results matching the search
   query.

   For example, flatpak search libreoffice returns LibreOffice stable release.

   You should note two things in the above command output. The “Application ID” and “Remotes”. You’ll
   need these two for installing the application.

Install Flatpak applications
   The generic way to install a Flatpak command from a repository is:
flatpak install <remote_repository> <application_id>

   For example, in the previous search command, you got the Application ID and the repository name. You
   can use this info to install the application in the following manner:
flatpak install flathub org.libreoffice.LibreOffice

   Some developers provide their own repository. You can use the absolute path to the application’s
   flatpakref to install the application.
flatpak install --from https://flathub.org/repo/appstream/com.spotify.Client.flatpakref

   If you have downloaded the .flatpakref file on your system, navigate to the directory and use the
   command to install it,
flatpak install <package-name>

   There are some useful terminal commands which can make your task easier around Flatpak applications.

Run a Flatpak
   To run a Flatpak application, you can use the command below:
flatpak run <package-name>

Display all Flatpak apps installed on your system
   You can display all Flatpak applications installed on your system using the command below:
flatpak list

Uninstall a Flatpak application
   You can use the uninstall option with the application id to remove the installed Flatpak package.
flatpak uninstall <application_id>

Updating all Flatpak applications at once
flatpak update

What do you think of Flatpak?
   Enabling Flatpak support certainly provides access to more software. Flathub website provides an easy
   way of finding these Flatpak applications.

   Not only Flatpak addresses the cross-platform application installation among Linux users, it saves
   efforts to develop separate bundles for different distribution. A single package can be used on
   various kinds of Linux distributions and the maintenance is super easy.

   Though, in comparison to Snap, Flatpak is slightly complicated. Relying on the application id
   instead of application name is an annoyance in my opinion. I was also surprised that installation and
   removal of Flatpak application doesn’t require sudo rights.
