filename: flatpak-appimage-and-snap-how-do-they-stack_20160902.txt
http://news.tecmint.com/flatpak-appimage-and-snap-how-do-they-stack/

Flatpak, Appimage And Snap – How Do They Stack?

   2 months ago

   Flatpak Software Packaging System Flatpak Software Packaging System
   Written by [25]Aaron Kili

   For many of us who actually started our Linux journey by using Ubuntu Linux, which by statistics is
   the most popular and most used Linux distribution at the moment, got familiar with downloading,
   installing and using .deb package format for Debian Linux, on which Ubuntu is based plus many other
   Linux distributions such as popular penetration testing operating system [26]Kali Linux , gaming
   focused [27]SteamOS, desktop-oriented distribution developed by [28]Raspberry Pi Foundation for a
   family of low-power single-board small computers among others.
   As a new Linux user, one will realize the vast number of distributions available with multiple
   versions and more so the pain of working with different software packaging formats and handling
   dependencies at the same time.

   But in the latest release of Ubuntu Linux, Xenial Xerus LTS, Canonical introduced a new software
   packing format and tools called Snap, which will be used along side .deb packing format. In an
   [29]announcement early this year, made by Canonical’s Olli Ries, he elaborated how the technology
   behind Snaps actually came about, how it will exist and work alongside the old Debian software
   packing system, its significance and general functionality plus so much more.

   There are also other new software packing systems already working to battle Snap in the game, and
   these are [30]Flatpak and [31]AppImage, we are going to get a clear understanding of what these
   technologies are, how they work and where they literally stack in the Linux ecosystem.

What is Snap and How does it work?
   This is a software packing format that bundles software including its dependencies into a single
   package, it is installed in a separate directory from other system directories unlike other old
   software packing formats such as .deb, .rpm plus many others. In this way, a package does not cause a
   clutter on your system reducing the risk of breaking the rest of your Linux system.

   You can take a look at how [32]Debian Packaging System and [33]RMP Packing System work to understand
   how they distinctively work in comparison to Snap.
   One advantageous property of Snap to users is that it works on multiple Linux distributions including
   Debian, Fedora, Arch of course Ubuntu and many of its derivatives such as Kubuntu, Lubuntu, Ubuntu
   MATE plus many others in that family. Users of REHL, CentOS, Elemetay OS, Linux Mint, Gentoo,
   OpenSUSE will have to wait as validation is on going and once approved, they will be able to use it.
   It also offers a secure package management mechanism as the installed packages will work in an
   isolated system on Linux, this limits the security risks that come with other software packing
   systems.

   While on the developers’ side, the whole idea of Snaps is also complemented by the use of
   [34]Snapcraft, which enables developers to easily work on software for different platforms that is
   mobile, PC, server and IoT devices by helping them bundle software and dependencies into a single
   package. This will do away with difficulties in the packing process plus handling of the updates by
   users as compared to the past methods.

What is AppImage and How does it work?
   This is also a software packing format that works in its own fashion as compared to the traditional
   software packing systems. It works in a comparable analogy to Snap, under it, an application is
   bundled together with all its dependencies in a single file, hence the idea of one app equals to one
   file.

   It is so simple and fast to use AppImage format applications, there is no need to install
   applications as before, all you need to do is download the application, make it executable and run
   it, as simply as that. As is with Snap, the rest of your system remains unchanged and this also
   offers a great security enforcement mechanism on a user’s system.
   AppImages can fundamentally and importantly run on any desktop Linux distribution there is and it
   therefore works closely in relation to how applications are used on Windows and Mac OS, one can think
   of AppImgaes as portable Linux apps.

   Also read: [35]OrbitalApps’ Portable Linux Apps for Ubuntu 16.04

   One limitation of this software packing system is that it works efficiently on desktop Linux, but
   System Administrators using desktop environments on their servers may take advantage of it as well.
   Checkout how to bundle your applications into AppImages from this [36]Wiki

What is Flatpak and How does it work?
   Flatpak is also a relatively new technology built from scratch, to enable users to install and run
   the same desktop application on multiple Linux distribution and with different versions. Designed and
   built to isolate applications from each other and the rest of the system, it also puts a lot of
   emphasis on security implementation in a host system.

   It also functions in a related approach to two previous software packing formats, the application is
   packaged together with all its dependencies into a single bundle, underneath a Flatpak application is
   a collection of runtimes, a collection of shared libraries which are shared by multiple apps on the
   Linux system. This means that users do not need to worry about updates in relation to distribution
   version changes.
   You can learn how to create, install and run Flatpak apps from [37]here.

   After a critical analysis and understanding the above technologies, you will come to a realization of
   the following important points:
     * The main goal is to develop distribution independent applications formats.
     * They all focus on isolation of the working of applications from each other and from the rest of
       the system.
     * Their implementation focuses greatly on providing mechanism to improve security of a users system
       in relation to how traditional systems actually alter the system upon installation.
     * These technologies are all about making it easy for users to install and update applications.
     * And lastly, they help reduce the workload on developers in terms of developing applications for
       different distributions.

   In conclusion,
   With Ubuntu’s Snap software packing format already being used on many Linux distributions, one may
   say it is bound to be embraced as an efficient and relevant alternative to the old packaging formats,
   as many Linux software developers and user anticipating it to become the dominant technology in the
   future on the Linux ecosystem. One limitation for AppImage and Flatpak will be their significance on
   only desktop Linux distributions.
