filename: get-weather-conditions-on-linux-commandline_20150415.txt
http://www.unixmen.com/get-weather-conditions-on-linux-commandline/

Get Weather Conditions On Linux From Commandline

   Working on commandline for about four years now I feel like I want to do everything from there even
   browsing on the internet. Maybe you never thought to get weather forecasts from Linux commandline,
   but you never know until you read an article from me. So now open a new terminal emulator on your
   machine and be ready to try some cool tools that will help to get weather conditions on Linux anytime
   you need it.

    A nice utility I use to get weather on my machine is the weather which can be installed on Ubuntu
   using the command shown below.
sudo apt-get install weather-util

    Once the installation of the package weather-util is finished type the following command on your
   terminal emulator.
weather

   An error will be echoed on your console. It will tell you to put an id which is required for giving
   back the conditions.
weather: error: id required for conditions

    The option -i can be used to specify an id. According to the official documentation about the
   weather tool you need the METAR station ID of the place you want to receive weather conditions.

   The following example is very practical and easy to understand how to make use of the option -i while
   using the weather utility.
weather -i KRDU

   The above command turns the result shown below.
 Current conditions at Raleigh-Durham International Airport, NC (KRDU)
 Last updated Apr 14, 2015 - 01:51 AM EDT / 2015.04.14 0551 UTC
 Temperature: 66.0 F (18.9 C)
 Relative Humidity: 72%
 Wind: from the S (170 degrees) at 3 MPH (3 KT)
 Sky conditions: mostly cloudy
 Precipitation last hour: A trace

   You can google for the METAR station id. For example If I want to find the weather conditions of the
   city I actually live which is Tirana I just use the following command.
weather -i LATI

   Then I get the following output.
 Current conditions at Tirana, Albania (LATI) 41-20N 019-47E 90M (LATI)
 Last updated Apr 14, 2015 - 02:20 AM EDT / 2015.04.14 0620 UTC
 Temperature: 55 F (13 C)
 Relative Humidity: 76%
 Wind: from the S (180 degrees) at 5 MPH (4 KT)

   A useful website I recommend to find the METAR id for the place you want to gather weather
   information is this [41]one. Anyway you can just google and the right results will come up.

   I am also curious to know weather conditions at Krakow, Poland. I use the following command.
 weather -i EPKK

   And get the following output after running the above command.
 Temperature: 41 F (5 C)
 Relative Humidity: 60%
 Wind: from the W (280 degrees) at 14 MPH (12 KT)
 Sky conditions: partly cloudy

   As you guys can see from the above examples the weather utility gives us information on the
   temperature both in Fahrenheit and Celsius, relative humidity, wind and also sky conditions.

   This tool is really great as it does its job very fast. What really makes it useful is the detailed
   and human readable information it provides about weather conditions of a country or a city.

   There are many other options available to the weather utility such as -c  or –city=CITY for
   specifying a city, -z for alert zones,  -m for metric units, -h to show some help message but we are
   not going to teach them here as it is best for you to try them yourself by experimenting in the
   commandline.

   Another tool I often use when I want to get weather conditions on a city is the weatherman. I can not
   find it on the default repos of my Ubuntu machine so I decided to teach you how to install this cool
   tool from source.

   Open a new terminal and download the weatherman using the following command.
curl -o weatherman-1.2.2.tar.gz -L https://github.com/subrosa/weatherman/archive/1.2.2.tar.gz

   Then check if the download is done and the file is where you placed it.
ls | grep weatherman

   The above command should produce the following output.
weatherman-1.2.2.tar.gz

   Now use the tar utility to extract the archive like shown below.
tar -zxvf weatherman-1.2.2.tar.gz

   Change directory using the cd command.
cd weatherman

    Then copy the weatherman executable binary inside /usr/bin directory like shown below.
sudo cp weatherman /usr/bin

   Finaly run the following command.
sudo chmod a+x /usr/bin/weatherman

   And now you can use weatherman on your machine. Want to test it? Just run the following command on
   your console.
weatherman

   You will be presented to alot of output. This output contains information on usage of the tool,
   examples and options that can be used to help you during the weather conditions gathering on. I find
   it very easy to make use of weatherman. Basically all you need to know in order to get weather
   conditions on a place while using this tool is just the name of the place.
weatherman "Tirana, Albania"

   The above command runs without any errors. It gives me the following information.
 Current Conditions for Tirana, Albania
 Reported by Tirana @ Apr 14, 2015 8:50 AM
 Temp: 14 C
 :
 :
 High: 14 C Wind Speed: NNE 3 Rain: 0.00mm
 Low: 8 C Gust: SSE 8 Rain/Month: 0.00mm
 Feels Like: 14 C Avg Wind: NNE 0 Sunrise:
 Humidity: 67% Pressure: 1024.05mb Sunset:
 Dew Point: 8 C Moonphase: Waning Crescent

    If you would like to use metric units just use the option -m like shown in the following command.
weatherman -m "Tirana, Albania"

   In case you want to use English units such as Fahrenheit and inches use the option -e like shown
   below.
weatherman -e "Tirana, Albania"

   The following is the result of the above command. As you guys can see units have changed from the
   default ones.
 Current Conditions for Tirana, Albania
 Reported by Tirana @ Apr 14, 2015 8:50 AM
 Temp: 57 F
 :
 :
 High: 57 F Wind Speed: NNE 2 Rain: 0.00"
 Low: 46 F Gust: SSE 5 Rain/Month: 0.00"
 Feels Like: 57 F Avg Wind: NNE 0 Sunrise:
 Humidity: 67% Pressure: 30.24" Sunset:
 Dew Point: 46 F Moonphase: Waning Crescent

   To get the version of the weatherman utility you are currently using just type the command shown
   below.
weatherman -v

   Mine is version 1.2.2. You can tell it by the output the above command produces.
weatherman 1.2.2

   I am very curious to know the weather conditions in Warsaw, Poland so let me perform a last check
   with the weatherman utility.
weatherman "Warsaw, Poland"

   And the following results are displayed on the console.
 Current Conditions for Warsaw, Poland
 Reported by Warsaw (Okecie) @ Apr 14, 2015 9:00 AM
 Temp: 6 C
 :
 :
 High: 6 C Wind Speed: WNW 19 Rain: 0.00mm
 Low: 1 C Gust: WNW 19 Rain/Month: 0.00mm
 Feels Like: 2 C Avg Wind: NNE 0 Sunrise:
 Humidity: 66% Pressure: 1022.02mb Sunset:
 Dew Point: 0 C Moonphase: Waning Crescent

   The weatherman utility does not have as many options as weather tool but it definitely does a great
   job and is easier to use. All you need is the name of the city and boom. It does everything for you.
   Why complicate life with ids and stuff?

   So, if you want something practical, easy to use and ready to go just make use of weatherman. You
   have everything you need to make a check of basic weather conditions.

   On the other hand weather-util has more options but it is a bit hard for a beginner to figure out how
   it works. But since we are nerds and love experimenting I highly recommend to try it alot.

Conclusion

   I am very sure there are many different ways to get weather forecasts on the  Linux command-line.
   Maybe other tools we don’t know and even shell scripts written in bash scripting by some nerds on
   their basement. In this article we took a very practical approach and tested two popular tools among
   Linux users for gathering weather information.

   In short words weatherman and weather work great, but if you know another tool or some hack that can
   be used to get weather information from the Linux console please do not hesitate to share it with us.
   We will be very happy if you do that!
