filename: gpg-encryption-howto_20140419.txt
http://futureboy.us/pgp.html

                                            GPG Tutorial

   This was once just a page that contained my public encryption key. It has now grown to
   become an introduction to how and why to use the GNU Privacy Guard encryption software
   (GPG) to protect your privacy. It is continually growing. If you have questions,
   corrections, suggestions, software recommendations, or want to exchange encrypted e-mails,
   please contact [1]Alan Eliasen. I'm also on the Twitter thingy as [2]aeliasen. Thanks!

PGP Public Key for Alan Eliasen

   Below is the public encryption key for Alan Eliasen, ([3]eliasen@mindspring.com) in armored
   OpenPGP format. This lets you write encrypted messages that only I can read!

Public Key

-----BEGIN PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK-----
Version: GnuPG v1.4.14 (GNU/Linux)
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=t+Fy
-----END PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK-----

   Fingerprint:  402CC0D3D52713E3FB7C7103E48184B5B05676B1
   Long Key ID:  E48184B5B05676B1
   Short Key ID: B05676B1

   (Did you notice that the long and short key IDs (of any key) are just the last 16 or 8
   digits of its fingerprint respectively? I didn't know that for a long time, but it's
   obvious when displayed this way. See the [4]Finding your longer key ID section of this
   document for more.)

   This is also available in a [5]plaintext file.

What is Public-Key Cryptography?

   In short, public-key cryptography solves the age-old problem "how do I communicate with
   someone securely without somehow exchanging a secret password first?" Exchanging a shared
   password securely is a hard problem. You may have no way to do so if your communications
   are monitored.

   With public-key encryption, instead of sharing a password, each party generates a "keypair"
   consisting of a "public" key and a "secret/private" key. Each party can then publish their
   "public" key to the world or send it directly to the other party, while keeping their
   secret key private and safe.

   If you have Person B's public key, you can do a few things with it:
     * Encrypt a message that only that Person B can decrypt. (They need their secret key to
       decrypt it.)
     * Validate that Person B signed a message with their secret key. This also lets you
       verify strongly that the message was not corrupted nor modified in transmission.

   With your secret key, you can do a few things:
     * Decrypt messages encrypted with your public key.
     * Sign messages that others can verify came from you (they need your public key to verify
       the signature.)

What I Use

   I accept and transmit all messages using the OpenPGP format, which is an open standard,
   ([6]RFC 4880) and the most widely used standard for public encryption, so communication
   should work with any OpenPGP-compatible program.

   For encryption and signing of e-mail (on Windows, Linux, and Mac) you can use a combination
   of:
     * [7]GNU Privacy Guard (GPG)
     * [8]Thunderbird, mozilla.org's stand-alone mail client.
     * The Mozilla [9]Enigmail add-on.

   If you're on Fedora, you will have infinitely better luck installing Enigmail from the
   Fedora distribution rather than obtaining the plug-in elsewhere. Install all three packages
   it by doing the following as root:

   yum install gnupg thunderbird thunderbird-enigmail

   After installing or updating in Fedora, you may not see the OpenPGP menus in Thunderbird
   until going to Tools | Add-ons and then disabling Enigmail, restarting Thunderbird,
   re-enabling Enigmail, and restarting Thunderbird.

   My main gripe is that Thunderbird changes version numbers rapidly and Enigmail sometimes
   doesn't keep up, which makes Enigmail claim that it's incompatible with your Fedora
   version. This is an important reason to use a package-manager like yum on Fedora which
   tends to keep them in sync. This is another reason it's good to know how to use the gpg
   executable manually.

   The first thing you want to do in Enigmail is to make all of its settings visible. You can
   do this from the menu items OpenPGP | Preferences | Display Expert Settings. The basic
   settings are inadequate.

   In Enigmail, I've had the best luck setting the keyserver to default to pgp.mit.edu, but
   this may no longer be necessary as it now contains a list of default keyservers which are
   more stable than they used to be. (But often still down.)

   The Gnu Privacy Guard [10]FAQ lists some of the other e-mail programs compatible with GPG.
   Note that you can use any e-mail program (that doesn't corrupt messages) along with the gpg
   executable on the command-line.

   For Macintosh, you can obtain GPG from the [11]GPGTools website. (I haven't personally used
   these, but others have recommended them.)

   Alternately, I sometimes use the pgg package in Emacs/XEmacs which is a wrapper around the
   gpg executable's functions. You can do something like highlight a region and do:
   M-x pgg-encrypt-region and encrypt directly within your documents.

   For encrypting files, or doing anything more interesting, I just use the gpg program on the
   command-line. If you're security-paranoid, the fewer executables, the better. Most of this
   document teaches you the fun and important things you can do with the gpg program to be
   secure.

  On Android

   On Android, you may want to experiment with [12]Android Privacy Guard (APG), which
   integrates with the [13]K-9 Mail program, but I do not vouch for it. APG has not been
   updated for a few years.

gpg or gpg2

   GPG version 2 may be on your system with the executable name gpg2 . Either executable can
   be used for these demonstrations. Both are very compatible with each other. (If you want to
   know a million different opinions on which you should be using, do a web search.) Version 1
   is more tested, and is usually a single monolithic executable. Version 2 is compiled with
   crypto libraries like libgcrypt externally linked, and is designed to work better with
   external password entry tools. From the command-line, I use version 1.

Importing My Key

  Importing From Enigmail

   The simplest way to import my key from an e-mail client (like Enigmail) is to import it
   from a keyserver. In Enigmail, you can search for keys using the menu items OpenPGP | Key
   Management | Keyserver | Search for Keys, and then searching for my name or my e-mail
   address eliasen@mindspring.com or my key ID, which is E48184B5B05676B1 or the shorter
   B05676B1. Then select its checkbox from the list and click "OK."

   A lazier and more dangerous way to import my public key from Enigmail is to try and send me
   an encrypted e-mail. (When composing a message, choose the menu item OpenPGP and select
   both Sign Message and Encrypt message.) Then, when you try to send, Enigmail will realize
   that it doesn't have my public key, and will bring up the Key Management window. From
   there, you can choose Download Missing Keys.

   Another way to import my key is to e-mail [14]the plaintext version of my key to your own
   e-mail address and choose the option like "Import PGP Key."

  Importing From GPG

   If your e-mail client doesn't allow automatic import of keys from an e-mail message, you
   will need to save the plaintext file listed above key to a file, then import the key
   manually. From GNU Privacy Guard, this is:

   gpg --import [filename]

   My key is available from pgp.mit.edu (all the major keyservers mirror each other, so you
   could probably get it from the keyserver of your choice, but this one seems to be pretty
   reliable.)

   You can browse the keys available on keyservers at [15]pgp.mit.edu or the often-slow
   [16]sks-keyservers.net. Who do you know who has a posted public key?

   From GNU Privacy Guard, you could import my key using the following (but read on to be more
   secure.)

   gpg --keyserver pgp.mit.edu --search-keys eliasen@mindspring.com

   Note that in all of these examples, whenever you see an e-mail address, you can usually
   substitute part of a name or part of an e-mail address, or a key ID. Most of these commands
   perform a substring search.

   Or, even more directly, my full key fingerprint is
   402CC0D3D52713E3FB7C7103E48184B5B05676B1, (it's more common but less secure to use the last
   16 or 8 characters of a key, so B05676B1 will work too. (Note that the shorter key IDs are
   just the last 16 or 8 characters of the fingerprint!) Read the technical note on [17]Short
   Key IDs below for interesting attack ideas using short keys.) The following gpg command
   will import my key from a keyserver, using my full fingerprint (you can also use the last 8
   or 16 hexadecimal digits of the fingerprint as the short or long key IDs.)

   gpg --keyserver pgp.mit.edu --recv-keys 402CC0D3D52713E3FB7C7103E48184B5B05676B1

   Read on, though, and see why just importing some key off a keyserver isn't enough to be
   sure that you're talking with me.

   You may not have to specify a keyserver in the lines above. Later versions of GPG have a
   more reliable keyserver list built in.

   [18]sks-keyservers.net monitors the status of keyservers in real-time. (But it's often
   down.) If you're having trouble importing signatures from a specific keyserver, or want a
   list of available keyservers, you might want to look there.

Getting Help

   gpg --help

   is your friend. It will list the most common options to GPG (but not all of them.) Other
   complete documents are available:
     * [19]GPG Manual
     * [20]Using the GNU Privacy Guard
     * [21]The GNU Privacy Handbook

Getting Started

   I long resisted the temptation to give an overly-simplified "Getting Started" section here
   because that may falsely lead you to believe that you're being secure. As this document has
   expanded greatly, it's becoming a better guide. However, the best way to get started with
   encryption is to go to the home site for [22]GNU Privacy Guard and read the "GNU Privacy
   Handbook" (available in lots of formats and languages) under the "Guides" section. This
   will walk you through setting up GPG on your system, including creating your secret keys.

   Creating your secret key will likely start with:

   gpg --gen-key

   You should probably use the default settings, except it doesn't hurt to make the key size
   as large as allowed (4096 bits currently.) The larger the key size, the longer it will take
   to initially generate your key (and encryption/decryption will be slightly slower. That is
   a Good Thing, as anyone attempting to break your encryption will also need to spend more
   time too.)

Generating a Revocation Key

   After generating your key, one of the first things you should do is create a revocation
   certificate:

   gpg --gen-revoke --armor --output=RevocationCertificate.asc your@email.address

   This certificate can be used to revoke your key if it is ever lost or compromised. Do not
   neglect this step! Print it out, save it on a disk, and store it safely. It will be short
   enough that you can type it back in by hand without much effort if you just print it out.

   If you lose your secret key or it is compromised, you will want to revoke your key by
   uploading the revocation certificate to a public keyserver (assuming you uploaded your
   public key to a public keyserver in the first place. See below.)

   If you have multiple unrevoked public keys and you have messages that say something like "I
   lost that one, this new key supersedes the other ones," (and I've seen this from people who
   like to claim crypto experience) then I know instantly that I can't trust you to follow
   good practice and maintain your secret information, and that I shouldn't trust you with my
   secrets. So protect your revocation key like you protect your secret keys. Read on to see
   why the "this key is my new key, ignore the others" excuse is an immediate "red flag" that
   should make you suspect either cryptographical incompetence or warn you that the person's
   being impersonated.

Using Stronger Algorithms

   This section is optional but important.

   By default, gpg uses weaker encryption algorithms than it could. This is to ensure
   compatibility with older versions.

   If you want to start using stronger algorithms from the beginning, jump to the [23]Using
   Stronger Algorithms section below to see how to use stronger algorithms by default. It may
   be important to do this from the start, as the algorithms that you want to use are
   specified in your public key.

Procedure for Verification

   Now, since you have my public key, are we secure? Well, no, not at all. Lots of people just
   getting started with cryptography don't realize that they have to somehow verify that this
   key belongs to me. To me, Alan Eliasen. The one who wrote this message. How do you know
   that the public key posted above is the one I posted? After all, the bad guys could have
   replaced it somehow.

   Listen carefully. This is important. Anyone can generate a public key for any e-mail
   address. Anyone can post that key to any key server. Only by verifying that the key really
   belongs to the person you think it does does it give you any security. Without this crucial
   verification, all that your cryptographic software does is ensures that bits weren't
   corrupted during transmission, and prevents casual observers from reading the message. It
   does not mean that you're talking to who you think you are. You could be talking to someone
   else entirely (a bad guy,) or you could be subject to a man-in-the-middle attack.

   Update: As proof of the above paragraph, after I posted this document widely, on
   2013-07-12, somebody generated a fake public key with my e-mail address and uploaded it to
   a key server! This is why you need to validate the key directly with the person to make
   sure you have the right key and the right person! That is, however, an unavoidable problem
   with public key servers. I thus can't be mad about it, but I can try to educate people to
   recognize this possibility and do the right thing by validating my public key with me
   personally! Note that picking a key from multiple options on a keyserver based on which is
   newest or largest or by comments about "this is my newest key" is dangerous and wrong.

   Still, if you want to send me encrypted e-mail, that may prevent other people from reading
   it. That's good, and sometimes that's all you need. Just understand why I don't have any
   reason to trust that you're who you say you are, and you don't have any reason to trust
   that you're really talking to me unless you've verified my key with me. Before I trust you
   with any secrets, I'll validate your identity.

  Fingerprint

   A key could be verified in many ways (such as, I could read you my whole public key, which
   is really time-consuming and error-prone. It's also bad because the key you see above can
   get longer and longer as other people sign it.) The usual alternative is to compare the
   fingerprint of what you think my public key is with the fingerprint of what I know my
   public key is.

   A fingerprint is a shorter number (usually expressed as a 40-hexadecimal-digit number) that
   contains a cryptographically strong hash of my public key. It's shorter than my full key,
   so it's not an unfoolable test, but the probability of finding another key with this
   fingerprint is very small indeed. Infinitesimally small. So small you don't have to worry
   about it. If someone else can find a matching fingerprint, they have enough power and money
   that they could make you vanish from the face of the earth. So, after you've imported my
   key, type:

   gpg --fingerprint eliasen@mindspring.com

   This will produce output that looks something like below (I have put the fingerprint in
   bold.)

   pub 1024D/B05676B1 2002-06-26
        Key fingerprint = 402C C0D3 D527 13E3 FB7C 7103 E481 84B5 B056 76B1
   uid Alan Eliasen (http://futureboy.homeip.net/) <eliasen@mindspring.com>
   sub 1024g/70AC29FB 2002-06-26

   Then, you need to verify this fingerprint with me. It's best to do it face-to-face, but if
   it's someone you know by voice, you can do it on the phone. If you don't know the person,
   check their driver's license. Ask other people (that you trust) who know them. Even if you
   don't know them, at least you're verifying that the key belongs to the person you're
   talking to.

   The other person will need to verify that their (unverified) copy of your public key
   matches what you know your public key to be. So bring a copy of your own fingerprint to the
   exchange:

   gpg --fingerprint your@email.address

   Of course, change the e-mail address above to the e-mail address you're confirming.

   Corollary: If someone puts the fingerprint of their key in their e-mail signature, or in a
   web page, they really aren't proving their identity. Think about it. If someone's
   pretending to be you, and forging your e-mail or your web site, they'd certainly replace
   the fingerprint too. It's not enough to rely on. If you see someone with their key
   fingerprint in their e-mail signature, it's not a reliable sign that the key with that
   fingerprint truly belongs to them.

    Fingerprints in Enigmail

   If you want to view a person's fingerprint or key ID in Enigmail, you can view that in the
   "Key Management" dialog, which is the place where you can view and manage public and
   private keys for everyone in your keyring.

   The steps to view the fingerprint are to follow the menu items: OpenPGP | Key Management |
   Search for a name | Right-click the name | Key Properties. This will bring up a dialog
   containing lots of information about the key, including its key ID and fingerprint
   (unfortunately, it's not easily printable.)

  My Key Verification Protocol

   If you wish to verify this key, please contact me and I will verify its fingerprint in a
   public meeting-place. I will be wearing a trenchcoat and a navy blue ascot. You must wear
   or carry a yellow tulip. Any other flower signifies that contact should be aborted, even if
   the exchange below is executed correctly. I must not underestimate the necessity of having
   an adequate stock of proper yellow tulips on hand for this purpose.

   I will say "The adobe is filled with an excess of straw this season."

   You must reply "The straw is for the young lambs which roam the heaths near Glasgow in the
   green, green spring."

   If I am satisfied with your response, I will reply "The greens at Saint Andrew's are boiled
   with ham and contain an excess of bitter kale."

   Do not make eye contact or show signs of recognition. If necessary, I will read the
   hexadecimal digits of the fingerprint while feigning a book order on my cell phone.

   Okay, I'm sort of kidding about this section. But you must verify keys with the other
   person to be truly secure.

   If you have verified my key, and trust me (and trust your own verification,) be sure to
   sign it.

Signing a Key

   Now that you've verified my identity, and my public key, you need to tell your
   cryptographical software that you trust my key. Otherwise, your cryptographical software
   should do the right thing and warn you that you're communicating with someone that you
   haven't verified. It's telling you that it has no reason to believe that the key you're
   using is the one that actually belongs to that person.

   Below are tips for signing and trusting keys using both GPG and Enigmail.

  Signing keys in Enigmail

   I'm a bit reticent to recommend using Enigmail to sign keys because some of its dialogs are
   deceptive and wrong. Read the next part very carefully.

   In Enigmail, you can sign keys by going to the menu item OpenPGP | Key Management.

   Search for the key, and then right-click it. You'll get the option to sign the key.

   After signing the key, you should assign a trust level to the person signing the key.
   Right-click the key name and choose "Set Owner Trust". Warning: This currently pops up a
   dialog that asks "how much do you trust the key?" but that's not the right question! The
   meaning of trust in the GPG software is how much you trust the person to validate other
   people's keys, not how much you trust the key itself! In GPG, the question is stated as:

     "Please decide how far you trust this user to correctly verify other users' keys (by
     looking at passports, checking fingerprints from different sources, etc.)"

   As you can see, that's a totally different question. This is why I encourage you to learn
   by using GPG on the command-line. It tends to be more rigorous and correct. Also GPG gives
   you more warnings about selecting dangerous choices like "trust ultimately." Read the next
   section to find out more.

  Signing keys in GPG

   To sign my key from gpg, you'll do something like:

   gpg --sign-key eliasen@mindspring.com

   (but see below for a better option.)

   This will give you some options for signing the key. Even better would be to edit your
   signature and trust settings for this user using the interactive menu:

   gpg --interactive --edit-key eliasen@mindspring.com

   Hint: Type "help" for the interactive commands. The commands "sign" and "trust" are the
   ones you're looking for. These allow you to both sign a key and indicate how much you trust
   me to verify other peoples' keys. If you think I'm stupid and lax when verifying and
   signing other peoples' keys, you'd assign me a low trust rating.

   After you've signed someone's key, you should send it back to them so they can show other
   people that you've signed it. You can export their key using:

   gpg --export --armor their@email.address

   and then sending that output to them. They can then import the changes using

   gpg --import

   You can also upload that signature to a keyserver, which makes that signature available to
   the world. See the [24]Publishing your Public Key section below for how to do this.

   If you're really not sure about my identity, and don't want to vouch for me publicly, you
   can locally sign my key, which means that you trust it for your own use only:

   gpg --lsign-key eliasen@mindspring.com

   Hint: If you publicly sign my key without actually verifying it with me, I'm going to
   assign you a very low trust rating.

Publishing your Public Key

   Sure, you can manually send your public key to people you want to communicate with, but
   what if someone needs to communicate with you securely and you haven't sent them your
   public key? The usual way is that you publish your public key to a keyserver so that anyone
   can import your key. Most of the keyservers in the world mirror each other, so a short time
   after you have posted your key to one server, it will be propagated to the others. As I
   have said above, I've had good luck for the past decade with pgp.mit.edu.

   You have some responsibilities before publishing your public key (or someone else's) to a
   keyserver, though. As mentioned above in the [25]Getting Started and [26]Procedure for
   Verification sections, you better have generated a revocation certificate for your key and
   put it somewhere very safe. Otherwise, if you lose your secret key, or it becomes
   compromised, the corresponding public key will sit forever on public keyservers, mocking
   you and demonstrating that you don't know how to protect your secrets properly. If you
   think you can delete a key from a keyserver, rather than revoking it, read the [27]FAQ at
   MIT's keyserver. (I think it's funny and awesome that they have a fake "delete a key" field
   on their website that just redirects to that FAQ no matter what key you enter.)

   If someone has your public key, they can basically do a few things with it:
    1. Encrypt messages that only you can decrypt.
    2. Validate that messages were signed by your secret key with a strong guarantee of
       certainty, and ensure that those messages were not tampered with or corrupted in
       transmission.

   These are good things. You want people to have your public key. So below are a few methods
   of publishing your public key to a keyserver. All achieve the same results.

  Manual Exporting and Uploading

   Now that you have generated a secret key and a public key, how do people find your public
   key so that can send encrypted mail to you? You can send someone your public key directly
   by, say, putting it in an email. To generate a copy of your public key that is easily
   e-mailed, you can do:

   gpg --armor --export your@email.address

   This will generate a nicely-formatted "ASCII armored" version of your public key which is
   suitable for e-mailing. "ASCII armor" is just a way of turning raw binary data (which will
   probably get corrupted if you try to send it through most e-mail programs) into a format
   using only limited ASCII characters, line-wrapped, with appropriate headers, and suitable
   for e-mailing. (Hint: It'll look something like my public key at the top of the page.)

   Note that the lines that begin

   -----BEGIN PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK----
   and end with

   -----END PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK----

   are a necessary part of the message. Don't forget to include them!

   Once you have this ASCII-armored public key, you can manually paste it into a form at a
   public key server like [28]pgp.mit.edu

   Again, just because someone seems to have sent you their public key, there's no reason to
   trust that it's from that person unless you have validated it with them using the
   instructions in the [29]Procedure for Verification section above. Make sure you verify any
   keys before trusting them!

  Uploading a Public Key via GPG

   One way to publish your key to a keyserver is the manual approach from the previous
   section: export an ASCII-armored key and manually paste it in to a form like the one at
   [30]pgp.mit.edu.

   The other way is to let your gpg program upload the key. You can't do this by specifying
   the e-mail address; you need to specify the public key's hexadecimal ID number. So how do
   you find this for the key you want to upload?

   gpg --list-keys your@email.address
   pub 1024D/B05676B1 2002-06-26
   uid Alan Eliasen (http://futureboy.homeip.net/) <eliasen@mindspring.com>
   sub 1024g/70AC29FB 2002-06-26

   In the above, my public key id is displayed on a line that says pub and contains an
   8-character hexadecimal code (B05676B1 in the sample above.) You will need to know this
   code to upload to the server.

   gpg --send-keys keyID
   gpg: sending key B05676B1 to hkp server subkeys.pgp.net

   You may want to specify --keyserver pgp.mit.edu as options to the above if you want a
   specific keyserver. Again, most keyservers mirror each other, but it will take time for
   keys to propagate across all servers.

   Note that after you've signed someone else's public key, indicating that you've verified
   their key and identity and vouch that the key is theirs, you can use this same procedure to
   upload your signed version of their public key to a keyserver, so people can see you've
   vouched for them. See the [31]Web of Trust section below for more information about this.

  Uploading a Public Key via Enigmail

   Again, in Enigmail, everything you do with keys is accessed through the menu item OpenPGP |
   Key Management. Search for the key you want to upload, right-click it, and you have the
   option to upload it to a keyserver. Couldn't be easier! You still have the same
   responsibilities to be very careful with signing other people's keys, though.

Manually Decrypting

   So you've received a file or message encrypted with GPG, but you don't have a fancy e-mail
   plugin to help you decode it. So how do you decode manually? Simple. From the command-line,
   if you just run gpg it will prompt you for input:

   gpg
   gpg: Go ahead and type your message ...

   From there, you can just cut-and-paste your message directly into gpg, and it will decrypt
   it, or import keys, or whatever is appropriate to the message. When you're done pasting,
   you may need to send your operating system's "end-of-file" character. This is Ctrl-D in
   most Unixlike systems and Ctrl-Z in Windows-like systems.

   If the encrypted data is in a file, you can automatically process it by just passing the
   filename to gpg on the command-line.

   gpg myfilename

   The gpg executable will generally just do the right thing with it, prompting you for
   passwords when necessary, saving output files, etc.

   Warning: When gpg encrypts or decrypts a file, it usually leaves the original file intact!.
   You must remember to delete the original file yourself, securely if possible. In Linux, you
   can use shred -u (shred just overwrites by default; the -u is necessary to delete the file
   afterward) or wipe commands to delete securely. On Windows, [32]sdelete works well.
   (Although secure deleting isn't guaranteed to work on solid state drives or flash drives
   due to wear-leveling algorithms. If you're using one of these, and want to securely delete,
   you have to write over all your free space with a tool like wipe or sdelete) However, don't
   believe the hype that you need to do dozens of overwrite steps. [33]This is very likely
   urban legend, or marketing lies. One overwrite is probably plenty.

Manually Encrypting

  Encrypting for E-mail

   If you don't have a fancy e-mail plugin that helps you encrypt your messages, it's easy
   enough to do from the command line. You'll need to save your message to a file.

   gpg --encrypt --sign --armor -r recipient@email -r your@email.com filename

   There are several important things in this command.
     * --encrypt tells gpg to encrypt the message using public-key encryption.
     * --sign adds a digital signature that lets you guarantee that the message was generated
       by you and was not corrupted nor modified in transmission. This is theoretically
       optional, but see the [34]Signing Messages section below for why this is very
       important.
     * --armor wraps your output in plaintext "ASCII armor". "ASCII armor" is just a way of
       turning raw binary data (which will probably get corrupted if you try to send it
       through most e-mail programs) into a format using only limited ASCII characters,
       line-wrapped, with appropriate headers, and suitable for e-mailing. This is necessary
       if you're pasting this into the body of an e-mail, or usenet posting, or forum posting,
       etc.
     * -r recipient Specifies recipients of the message. You must already have imported the
       public keys of the recipients. You can specify multiple recipients. If you don't
       specify recipients on the command-line, gpg will prompt you to enter them
       interactively. These recipients can also be key IDs.
       Warning! This is important and interesting! Note that in the example above, your email
       address is specified as one of the recipients. If you do not explicitly add your own
       address to the list of recipients, you will not be able to decrypt the message! That is
       interesting and important and awesome. You may want to write something and send it to
       someone that you cannot ever possibly be compelled to decrypt! It will be impossible
       for you to decrypt, even though you wrote it and encrypted it! That is cool. Read the
       [35]Why Public-Key Encryption is Cool section below for more about why public-key
       encryption is cool.
     * filename is the filename of the file you're encrypting. This is not strictly required.
       If you don't specify a filename, GPG will listen for input, and you can type a message
       directly or cut and paste it in. This is awkward, though. When you're done pasting, you
       may need to send your operating system's "end-of-file" character. This is Ctrl-D in
       most Unixlike systems and Ctrl-Z in Windows-like systems.
       Warning: (I'm repeating this again.) When gpg encrypts or decrypts a file, it usually
       leaves the original file intact!. You must remember to delete the original file
       yourself, securely if possible. See the [36]warning above for more details on how to do
       this.

  Encrypting Files

   GPG is not just for e-mail! You may want to use it to protect your sensitive files also.
   Encrypting your files is just about like encrypting an e-mail. The simplest command line
   is:

   gpg --encrypt filename

   This will prompt you for the recipients (which should include your own e-mail address so
   you can decrypt it!)

   A more complete command-line might look like:

   gpg --encrypt --sign -r your@email.com filename

   Some interesting things to note and optional arguments:
     * --encrypt tells gpg to encrypt the message using public-key encryption. (See the
       [37]Symmetric Encryption/Decryption section below for alternate ways to encrypt a file
       with a simple password and no public keys.)
     * --sign adds a digital signature that lets you guarantee that the message was generated
       by you and was not corrupted nor modified in transmission. This is theoretically
       optional, but very important.
       Think about it: how do you know that someone didn't replace your encrypted file with a
       different one? By digitally signing the message, you can get a strong guarantee that
       you're the one who encrypted the message and that it hasn't been tampered with or
       corrupted. See [38]Signing Messages section below for more on digital signatures.
     * --armor (optional, probably unnecessary) wraps your output in plaintext "ASCII armor".
       "ASCII armor" is just a way of turning raw binary data (which will probably get
       corrupted if you try to send it through most e-mail programs) into a format using only
       limited ASCII characters, line-wrapped, with appropriate headers, and suitable for
       e-mailing. This is necessary if you're pasting this into the body of an e-mail, or
       usenet posting, or forum posting, etc. Note that this will increase the size of your
       message on disk.
     * --output filename (optional) specify the output file.
     * -r recipient Specifies recipients of the message. Can also be written --recipient. You
       must already have imported the public keys of the recipients. You can specify multiple
       recipients with multiple -r arguments. If you don't specify recipients on the
       command-line, gpg will prompt you to enter them interactively. These recipients can
       also be key IDs.
       Warning! This is important and interesting! Note that in the example above, your email
       address is specified as one of the recipients. If you do not explicitly add your own
       address to the list of recipients, you will not be able to decrypt the file! That is
       interesting and important and awesome. You may want to create a file for another person
       that you cannot ever possibly be compelled to decrypt! It will be impossible for you to
       decrypt, even though you wrote it and encrypted it! That is cool. Read the [39]Why
       Public-Key Encryption is Cool section below for more about why public-key encryption is
       cool.
     * filename is the filename of the file you're encrypting. This is not strictly required.
       If you don't specify a filename, GPG will listen for input, and you can type a message
       directly or cut and paste it in. This is awkward, though. When you're done pasting, you
       may need to send your operating system's "end-of-file" character. This is Ctrl-D in
       most Unixlike systems and Ctrl-Z in Windows-like systems.
       Warning: (I'm repeating this again.) When gpg encrypts or decrypts a file, it usually
       leaves the original file intact!. You must remember to delete the original file
       yourself, securely if possible. See the [40]warning above for more details on how to do
       this.

Attachments, S/MIME, and PGP/MIME

   What do you do if you want to send an encrypted file attachment in an e-mail?

   There are standards called [41]S/MIME and PGP/MIME that try to standardize the handling of
   encrypted attchments. You cannot be sure that your recipient's e-mail client will be able
   to handle them, so I strongly recommend never using them. Enigmail doesn't even handle its
   own attachments that it creates well.

   Examples of situations that will cause PGP/MIME or S/MIME attachments to fail or be lost:
     * Most web-based email services.
     * Most phone- and tablet-based email software.
     * List servers or remailers that strip attachments.
     * List servers that just don't handle all attachments perfectly.
     * Corporate firewalls that remove attachments.
     * Overeager malware scanners.
     * Simple, secure e-mail clients that can only display plaintext.
     * Not-yet-ready-for-attachments e-mail tools like Enigmail itself.

   I strongly recommend always sending encrypted messages or encrypted attachments as
   ASCII-armored OpenPGP blocks directly in the body of an e-mail. This will ensure that any
   e-mail program will still be able to handle them.

   You can hand-encrypt any attachments using:

   gpg --armor --encrypt --sign -r your@email.com -r recipient@email.com filename

   as outlined in the [42]Signing Files section above. Then just paste the results into the
   body of your e-mail. You can paste in multiple attachments this way, too.

  Attachments in Enigmail

   Enigmail is buggy and insecure when sending and receiving encrypted attachments or
   PGP/MIME. I don't recommend it at the moment.

   Enigmail fails, for instance, to import a public key or other attachments that it attached
   itself. You can test this by sending encrypted attachments and public keys to yourself.

   Enigmail is also insecure in handling PGP/MIME (and possibly S/MIME) attachments because it
   appears to always automatically and silently decrypt the message for you, even if you have
   Enigmail configured to not decrypt by default! (Update: see a [43]possible solution for
   this if you're on Linux.) This is bad if someone's looking over your shoulder. You may not
   even notice that the message was encrypted, and forget to encrypt your reply, or forget to
   verify the signature, or do something that compromises your security.

   Even if you fix the problem above, Enigmail is still buggy when handling PGP/MIME messages,
   as it will try to auto-save your messages as you write them, which can pop up a dialog
   asking you to choose recipients to encrypt to while you're typing, causing you to randomly
   select recipients as you type. It's just totally broken and annoying.

   For these reasons, I recommend using the manual procedure above, but here are some tips for
   using Enigmail if you're lazy and don't care if your attachments get lost or are unreadable
   by your recipient.

    Disabling PGP/MIME in Enigmail

   The place to turn off PGP/MIME in Thunderbird/Enigmail has been continually changing, but
   now it's currently hidden under each e-mail account on the (usually) left-hand side of your
   screen under OpenPGP Security where the option Use PGP/MIME by default should be unchecked.
   Here's the [44]current screenshot from the Enigmail project showing where PGP/MIME should
   be turned off for each account.

   When sending encrypted e-mails with attachments in Enigmail, you will be presented with a
   dialog asking how you want files to be attached:

   Enigmail file attachment prompt. Choose the option for using inline PGP.

   Choose the option "Encrypt/sign each attachment separately and send the message using
   inline PGP." However, this doesn't even do the right thing. Its results are unfortunately
   not identical to the recommended "hand-encrypt and paste" technique described above. It
   currently still adds multiple attachments, which may get stripped out by mail filters or
   lost in web-based e-mail clients. Enigmail is then often unable to open these attachments
   reliably. It certainly can't open public keys that it attaches. Really, just don't use
   Enigmail for attachments right now. Hand-encrypt them as shown in the previous section.
   It'll simply work better for more people.

   In short, all encrypted communications will be accessible to the most people if you always
   just use ASCII-armored OpenPGP blocks in the body of a plaintext message.

Signing Messages

   In addition to encryption, gpg allows you to digitally "sign" messages, which has multiple
   benefits:
     * It lets you ensure that a message has not been corrupted nor modified in transmission.
     * It allows someone to verify that you signed it. (To be more precise, to verify that the
       signer of the message used your secret key, given that they've verified your public key
       with you, and that your secret key hasn't been compromised.)

   You should always sign your encrypted messages. Think about it. Everyone potentially has
   your public key. That's expected. Anyone can encrypt a message to you using your public
   key, and pretend that it's from someone you know. (It's easy to spoof e-mails, but that's
   another discussion.) Only if you verify (via the digital signature) that the message was
   signed by someone whose key you have verified, can you trust the communication.

   Corollary: You should actively distrust unsigned encrypted communications. If someone's
   trying to impersonate your friends, they'll just conveniently "forget" to sign their
   messages.

   A signed message gives a mathematically very strong certainty that the message was signed
   by you.

   In your e-mail client, always choose to sign and encrypt a message. Below are some ways to
   sign messages manually.

  Configuring Enigmail for Automatic Signing

   By default, Enigmail does not automatically sign encrypted e-mails. This is a bad choice,
   in my opinion (stated in the section above.)

   You can, however, make Enigmail automatically sign all encrypted mails. The setting is very
   hard to find, though. You need to do the following:
     * The first thing you want to do in Enigmail is to make all of its settings visible. If
       you haven't done so already, you can do this from the menu items OpenPGP | Preferences
       | Display Expert Settings. The basic settings are inadequate.
     * Start to compose a new e-mail. That is, click the "Write" button.
     * In the "Write" window, choose the top menubar item OpenPGP | Default Composition
       Options | Signing/Encryption Options.
     * Check the Sign encrypted messages by default box.
     * Click OK.

  Signing a plaintext message

   Sometimes you just want to sign an unencrypted message to make it clear that you produced
   it and that it hasn't been tampered with nor corrupted in transmission. For example:
     * Sending an important vote.
     * Important business communications.
     * Maybe you're mailing a URL that looks suspicious and spammy, and your recipient wants
       to validate that it's actually from you and not from a spammer or a virus. (Saying
       "this is really from me" in the e-mail is not good enough!)
     * Being very certain that the message is not corrupted in transmission.
     * Allowing recipients to verify that data comes from you and is valid. For example, a
       school could prove that test scores came from them and were not tampered with.
       (Institutions should use this more!)

   The --clearsign option will wrap the message in an ASCII-armored signature but will not
   otherwise modify its contents. This allows even the losers who don't use gpg to read the
   body of the message, but allows gpg users to verify that you wrote it and that the message
   wasn't changed.

   gpg --clearsign filename
   -----BEGIN PGP SIGNED MESSAGE-----
   Hash: SHA1
   I vote YES on this important measure.
   Alan Eliasen
   -----BEGIN PGP SIGNATURE-----
   Version: GnuPG v1.4.13 (GNU/Linux)
   iEYEARECAAYFAlHZCvgACgkQ5IGEtbBWdrF5HgCfc4xhT29ouAWdo1PMlyDKIfaq
   pGoAoKig5sCXukrPPoKC1ZYB5CW7BzNL
   =WPPL
   -----END PGP SIGNATURE-----

  Verifying Signatures

   People who have verified your public key can verify messages that you've signed by passing
   the output back into gpg:

   gpg --verify vote.txt.asc
   gpg: Signature made Sun 07 Jul 2013 12:30:16 AM MDT using DSA key ID B05676B1
   gpg: Good signature from "Alan Eliasen (http://futureboy.homeip.net/)
   <eliasen@mindspring.com>"

   If they haven't verified and signed your public key, then they will be warned that the key
   is untrusted. This means that all that they can tell for certain is that the message wasn't
   corrupted in transmission, but it really could have been written by anyone! Beware
   "Untrusted good signature!" It means that the signature is by someone whose fingerprint you
   haven't verified.

  Detached Signature

   Sometimes you want to sign a file, but without modifying it like the --clearsign option
   above does, because people would need to edit the file or use gpg to get at the contents.

   Say, you're sending an executable file to someone. You don't want to tamper with the
   executable file, but executable files are scary and potentially very dangerous. So how can
   you guarantee to the recipient that nobody has tampered with the file and that it actually
   came from you? By creating a "detached signature" which is a separate file that contains a
   signature for the specified file. This is achieved through the --detach-sign command:

   gpg --detach-sign filename

   Then you ship the signature file along with the original file. The recipient can verify
   that you signed the file and that it has not been modified with the --verify command:

   gpg --verify filename.sig
   gpg: Signature made Sun 07 Jul 2013 02:31:05 AM MDT using DSA key ID B05676B1
   gpg: Good signature from "Alan Eliasen (http://futureboy.homeip.net/)
   <eliasen@mindspring.com>"

  Proving You Wrote Something but Remaining Temporarily Anonymous.

   Let's say you found out that a huge company (we'll call them Mapple) wrote a really crappy
   incompetent insecure website that leaked a lot of their customers' information that anyone
   could access trivially by adding 1 to a number.

   Now, you're not sure if the company is awesome and honest and will pay you a handsome bug
   bounty for pointing out their incompetent security hole and helping them protect their
   customers' information, or if they are psychotic morons who will claim post-facto that your
   access of information they intentionally published on a public webserver without any access
   control was "unauthorized" and have you charged under the insanely incompetently-written
   and outdated Computer Fraud and Abuse Act ([45]CFAA).

   So, how do you report this anonymously? Well, one very strong way would be to generate a
   new keypair without your name on it, publish that public key, and sign all your messages
   with the corresponding secret key. This lets you do a few things:
     * You can prove that all subsequent messages signed with the same key are from the same
       person, even if you jump to different e-mail addresses or communication channels.
     * If they decide to be honest and offer you a bounty for your services to them and their
       customers, you can prove in the future that you're the person in possession of the
       corresponding secret key that signed the messages, for example, by decrypting something
       sent to you encrypted with your public key. Nobody else would be able to falsely claim
       that they're the submitter without verifying that they have the corresponding secret
       key.
     * If they are evil about it, you can remain anonymous to them. If you want to prove to
       others that you made the disclosure, you can, by signing a message with the same secret
       key or decrypting information sent to you that was encrypted with your public key (by
       using your secret key.)

   (This is a mathematically super-strong version of the old trick of ripping a dollar bill in
   half, and sending half of it to someone. If they want to verify your identity, only you
   will have the other half of the bill. A dollar bill, with distinctive tearing pattern and
   matching serial numbers, is hard to forge.)

Updating Keys

   People are constantly updating their keys for various reasons:
     * Keys get compromised or lost and they are revoked.
     * Keys are signed by more people, building a [46]Web of Trust.
     * Users change the encryption algorithms they prefer. (See the [47]Using Stronger
       Algorithms section for more about this.)

   Updates to keys can be published to public key servers, including new signatures. You can
   periodically update your keys by using

   gpg --refresh-keys

   This lets you ensure that the keys you're using haven't been revoked. You might even find
   that more people have signed your public key. (And they better have validated your key
   fingerprint and your identity using the [48]validation procedure outlined above, or they
   can't be trusted to sign keys properly and you should assign them a low trust rating!)

   Note that other people can sign your public key and upload the signed key to a public
   webserver! So you might even find that your own key has been updated!

  Updating Keys in Enigmail

   Enigmail can update all of the keys in your keyring from a public key server. The way to
   trigger this is from the menu items: OpenPGP | Key Management | Keyserver | Refresh all
   Public Keys. Again, I might suggest that pgp.mit.edu has been a reliable keyserver for me.

  Listing Your Keys

   You can get a list of the keys on your keyring and their corresponding key IDs with:

   gpg --list-keys

   If you enter part of the name or e-mail address or key ID as the last argument on the
   command-line, then only keys that match that pattern will be listed.

   gpg --list-keys Alan

  Who Signed My Key?

   Now that you've updated keys from a keyserver, you might want to see who has signed your
   key. After all, anyone can sign any key and re-upload that key to a key server. You can see
   the signatures with the --list-sigs command to gpg:

   gpg --list-sigs your@email.address

   In Enigmail, you can see the signatures for a key by going to OpenPGP | Key Management,
   searching for a key, right-clicking on that key, and then choosing View Signatures.

   Or you can browse your key on a public keyserver, like [49]pgp.mit.edu. This is
   advantageous because if you haven't imported someone's key yet, they will just show up as a
   key ID number.

   Again, if someone signed your key without validating the fingerprint with you, they are
   actively damaging the web of trust. You should import their public key just so you can tell
   your software to actively distrust it as outlined in the [50]Signing a Key section.

   (After I published this document, an out-of-control signer whom I've never met signed my
   key and published the changes to a public website. I had to download his public key so I
   could tell gpg to actively distrust his signatures!)

Building a Web of Trust

   In the examples above, I stress the importance of verifying people's public keys with them.
   But sometimes you can't do that directly. So how can you verify someone else's public key?

   Let's say I want to talk to Bob. I've downloaded a public key with his name from a
   keyserver, but I can't be sure that key belongs to him. I could maybe call him on the phone
   and verify his key that way, but I don't know his voice, and I don't have his phone number.
   Or maybe he's even under duress.

   Luckily, my friend Alice has signed his public key. I trust Alice to have verified his key
   properly. I have validated and trusted Alice's public key personally. Thus I have a good
   reason to believe that Bob's key really belongs to him.

   This is why it's important to validate other people's keys very carefully and to build a
   web of trust--so you can communicate with people whose keys you can't personally verify.

   See the [51]Signing a Key section above to see how to sign someone else's key and upload it
   to a keyserver.

   Conversely, you may not want to publicly sign the keys of people you communicate with. You
   may not want others to know who you communicate with. You may have more than one keypair,
   and use them selectively for communications with a single person once they've demonstrated
   strong cryptographic practices.

   This is serious business. [52]An example from Syria shows how people die when others don't
   protect their communications.

   If you don't want anyone to be able to analyze who you're talking to, even by traffic
   analysis of key IDs, you can specify [53]hidden recipients in your messages.

Good Encryption Practices

   By using encryption improperly, you can make your encrypted communications easier to break.
   Some of the tips here are speculative and may not apply to all cryptographic algorithms,
   but many cryptographic algorithms are subject to common types of attacks. These tips will
   help mitigate those potential weaknesses if algorithms are found to be vulnerable to these
   types of attacks.

   TODO: Improve ALL THE THINGS. [54]Send me more examples of good and bad cryptographic
   practice, and ciphers that have been broken by poor cryptographic practice.
     * Don't be predictable. This is the way that much crypto has historically been broken--by
       knowing words or phrases that are likely to occur in the message. This is known as a
       [55]"known-plaintext" attack. For example, the WWII German Enigma machine codes were
       partially broken because people would end with expected phrases like "Heil Hitler!" or
       from spelling out numbers. (Looking for the number "eins", (1), the most common number,
       was a useful tactic in breaking Enigma.)
       You think this is academic and known-plaintext attacks can't happen? Well, take a look
       at [56]this recent break on the widely-used RC4 cipher. (It's used in SSL/TLS and in
       WEP/WPA in wi-fi.) It was found that if you knew a small amount of plaintext, you could
       recover the rest of the message (given a fairly large amount of encrypted
       communications, to be sure.) With as little as 6 bytes of plaintext, and a large number
       of communications, the rest of the message could be decrypted with high probability.
       (The more bytes are known, the easier it is to break.) Also, keep in mind that breaks
       in cryptographic algorithms only get worse.
     * Don't be polite. As a corollary of the above, don't start and end your message with
       predictable phrases or pleasantries.
     * Don't send HTML-formatted encrypted emails. There's a large amount of predictable
       boilerplate in HTML.
     * No signatures! As a corollary of the above, when sending encrypted messages, don't
       include your usual .sig file with your name, e-mail address, phone number, password,
       website, company policy, etc.
       This doesn't mean "no cryptographic signatures!" You still want cryptographically
       strong signatures like the kind you get with --sign. Smart e-mail add-ons like
       Thunderbird with Enigmail can suppress your signature when using encryption. Or you
       should encrypt just the meat of your email (and not the signature) if you need that
       silly signature.
     * Don't quote previously-encrypted text. When replying to an encrypted message, don't
       quote the original text. Again, having large stretches of expected text has been the
       downfall of many cryptographic algorithms.
     * Don't encrypt the same message multiple times. Some codes have weaknesses that if the
       same plaintext message is encoded several times (say, to several different people, or
       to the same person multiple times,) then more information can be derived about the
       contents or the key. If someone isn't able to read your encrypted message, don't send
       it again. After all, they're not following good cryptographic practice if they can't
       read it, and you should limit encrypted communications with them. Or, if you must send
       it again, alter it as much as possible before encrypting and sending it again. If
       encrypting the same message to multiple people, encrypt to all of them at once
       (assuming you want them to know who you're communicating with. They will at least see
       the key ID numbers.)
     * Don't have encrypted and unencrypted versions of the same information. As [57]noted
       above, gpg does not automatically delete the plaintext version of a file when you
       encrypt it! Read that section on securely deleting files if possible.
     * Garbage is good. One of the hard problems in cryptography is identifying when a message
       has been successfully decrypted. How do you know? When it all comes out as mostly
       alphanumeric characters? When its word frequency looks like English? Make it hard for
       the bad guys. Jam in a bunch of random bytes into your message if you can. It'll make
       it harder to even detect the fact that the message was decrypted properly. Send your
       friends encrypted random bytes every day just for fun because screw the surveillance
       state we live in! If everyone did this, it would be utterly prohibitive to try and
       decrypt all of the random data flying around.
     * If it's received encrypted, store it encrypted. Some e-mailer plugins will offer to
       decrypt messages and store the decrypted versions in your mail folder. Don't do this.
       It allows someone to mount a chosen-plaintext attack on you just by sending you an
       encrypted message. Yes, it will make your messages impossible to search for content.
       But that's good.
     * Don't encrypt stuff from untrusted sources. There is a class of attacks called a
       [58]"chosen-plaintext" attack. Some encryption algorithms can be weakened or completely
       defeated if the attacker is allowed to choose the text that you are going to encrypt
       with your key. Always refuse to encrypt something specific that a third party asks you
       to encrypt, especially if it's lengthy.
     * Hide your encryption entirely! There's a branch of cryptography called "steganography"
       which hides secret communications in innocuous places that are very hard to detect. For
       example, by slightly modifying the least-significant-bits in the pixels of a JPEG
       image, you can hide encrypted messages in pictures of kittens! Or, you can hide them by
       adding slight, undetectable noise to audio files.
       It becomes very difficult and expensive to determine that a particular image even
       contains steganographic content. That's the best way to hide your information,
       especially as the NSA has decided that using cryptography to protect your privacy is
       probable cause that you're a terrorist, and they allow themselves to keep encrypted
       content "for as long as necessary" to break it.
       I have built some web-based [59]Steganographic Tools that let you experiment with
       steganography from your browser! If you want to be more secure, of course, you'll run
       the steganography tools on your own machine. That page tells you more about the
       steghide program. (Hint: in Fedora it's yum install steghide )

Symmetric Encryption/Decryption

   Sometimes you don't want to use public key encryption. You can use old-fashioned
   "symmetrical" encryption where everyone shares a common password. In gpg, you do this by
   using --symmetric instead of --encrypt:

   gpg --symmetric filename

   gpg will then prompt you for a password.

   Warning: (I'm repeating this again.) When gpg encrypts or decrypts a file, it usually
   leaves the original file intact!. You must remember to delete the original file yourself,
   securely if possible. See the [60]warning above for more details on how to do this.

   If you want to paste the encrypted file into an e-mail or something, you can use the
   --armor option.

   The encrypted file can be decrypted by passing it back into gpg:

   gpg filename.gpg

   If you want to force the encryption algorithm used, you can add the --cipher-algo name
   command-line option, for example --cipher-algo AES256 . The list of available encryption
   algorithms in your version of gpg can be found by running the gpg --version command.

   Symmetric encryption has its problems. It doesn't let you simultaneously sign the message
   to indicate that it hasn't been tampered with or replaced with another file that someone
   else generated! (You can, however, sign it manually later using the techniques in the
   [61]Signing Messages section, but it's theoretically possible that an attacker can replace
   that file in the brief time between when you encrypted it and when you signed it.)

   If you use symmetric encryption, you also need to solve the age-old problem "how do I
   communicate the password securely?"

Why Public-Key Encryption is Cool

     * In short, public-key encryption solves the age-old problem "how do I communicate a
       password securely?" You no longer have to. You just need the other person's public key,
       which can be published to the world.
     * You can also encrypt a message that you can not decrypt! This may sound silly, but you
       may want to write something to someone that you cannot ever possibly be compelled to
       decrypt! It will be impossible for you to decrypt, even though you wrote it and
       encrypted it and even if you have the file in your possession and even if you have all
       your secret keys and you know all of your own passwords and have them written down!
       That is cool. (You can smile serenely while they're beating you with a rubber hose,
       knowing that you can't endanger the lives of your sources, nor give up your rights,
       even if you felt like that might be entertaining for a change.) You can see how to do
       this physically in the [62]Encrypting Messages You Can't Decrypt section.
       This actually has many important and practical uses:
          + If you're a reporter (or other human) traveling abroad, you can encrypt materials
            using public-key encryption, to someone else's key, but without encrypting to your
            own public key. (Warning: some tools will encrypt to yourself by default. Read
            on.) It's easy to create a message that you can never possibly decrypt yourself,
            and cannot possibly be compelled to do so! Ever! You could encrypt them, say,
            using only the public key belonging to your newspaper's editor or lawyer. (And if
            your newspaper's editor and lawyer don't have public keys, have them [63]contact
            me and I will help them. They need to do this. Now. Before they kill people.) You
            can be detained and couldn't ever be compelled to give up the password, as you
            never had it!
            You don't have to be in [64]Syria (although journalists who don't use encryption
            kill people; read the link) or North Korea for this type of Orwellian police state
            coercion to happen. Even the otherwise-civilized United Kingdom has vile
            horrendous laws [65]that can jail you without trial if you don't give up
            passwords.
            Edward Snowden has also stated that he has in his possession encrypted documents
            that he cannot possibly be compelled to decrypt, even under torture. (But maybe
            other trusted people potentially can decrypt them.) Public-key encryption is
            probably what he was hinting at. Nice work.
            Also see the [66]Hidden Recipients section of this document to see how to hide the
            people to whom you've encrypted. That may be very important for journalists or
            dissidents or ordinary people who want to assert their rights to free association.
            It also allows you to post encrypted messages to public forums without anyone
            knowing who you're talking to.
            Also see my [67]Steganography tools which let you hide the fact that any hidden
            communications are happening at all! You can hide secret communications in
            pictures of kitties.
          + Let's say you have a web server that collects very sensitive user information. You
            don't trust the security of the web server, but you have to keep the information
            on that web server for a while before you move it elsewhere. Say, to a computer
            completely disconnected from the outside world. With public key encryption, you
            can encrypt information with a public key stored on the web server. However, the
            secret key would not ever be kept on that server! Even if someone breaks your web
            server wide open and has total access to every single file, and every single
            algorithm, and the public key, they will still never, ever be able to decrypt the
            private information on the server because the secret key needed to decrypt it is
            not on the server at all! [68]Miracles!
          + If you rent space in a server farm, this can prevent malicious administrators at
            the hosting company (who probably hold superuser access on your machine, and can
            read all your files) from being able to do anything with your data. And it keeps
            your web server administrator or database administrator from seeing that sensitive
            data, even if they have complete access to every file on the computer.
          + A real-world example of storing sensitive communications: The Federal
            Communication Commission's (FCC's) [69]Lifeline subsidized cell-phone program for
            low-income people leaked highly sensitive customer information for over 170,000
            people, including Social Security numbers, birth dates, home addresses, and
            sensitive details about family finances from a public web server. Think about how
            you could use public-key encryption to collect and encrypt this data securely on
            the webserver, and only be able to decrypt it somewhere else much safer.
       Again, see how to do this in the [70]Encrypting Messages You Can't Decrypt section.
     * It's easy to revoke access to one member of a group. If everyone in a group shared a
       password, it would be very difficult to remove one person's access. A different
       password might have to be created, and that password would have to be communicated
       securely to all other members of a group. Public-key encryption means that you can
       control exactly who is allowed to read future communications. If you don't want someone
       to read it, just stop encrypting to that person's public key. Even if they can still
       see your encrypted communications (like on a public mailing list,) they will no longer
       be able to decrypt it.

Fun Tips and Tricks

   Here are a collection of fun tips and tricks and puzzles for using GPG. Please [71]send me
   more.

  Using Stronger Algorithms

   This section is optional but important.

   By default, gpg uses weaker encryption algorithms than it could. This is to ensure
   compatibility with older versions.

   Part of your public key specifies your preferences for the encryption algorithms that you
   want people to use when communicating with you. These are, by default, somewhat weak. You
   can view and modify these preferences to make your communications stronger.

   To view all of the algorithms supported by your version of gpg, type:

   gpg --version

   This will give an output that looks something like this:

   gpg (GnuPG) 1.4.14
   Copyright (C) 2013 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
   License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
   This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
   There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
   Home: ~/.gnupg
   Supported algorithms:
   Pubkey: RSA, RSA-E, RSA-S, ELG-E, DSA
   Cipher: IDEA, 3DES, CAST5, BLOWFISH, AES, AES192, AES256, TWOFISH,
           CAMELLIA128, CAMELLIA192, CAMELLIA256
   Hash: MD5, SHA1, RIPEMD160, SHA256, SHA384, SHA512, SHA224
   Compression: Uncompressed, ZIP, ZLIB, BZIP2

   You can modify your public key's cipher preferences by interactively editing your key:

   gpg --interactive --edit-key your@email.address

   This will display a list of matching public keys. You may need to enter the number of your
   key in that list so you can edit it.

   Hint: You can always type help at the gpg> prompt to see all available commands. There's
   lots of fun stuff hidden in here.

   Next, show your current algorithm preferences by typing at the gpg> prompt:

   showpref

   Which produces something like:

   Cipher: AES, TWOFISH, CAST5, BLOWFISH, 3DES
   Digest: RIPEMD160, SHA1
   Compression: ZLIB, ZIP, Uncompressed
   Features: Keyserver no-modify

   The protocols listed first will be used first. Note that the preferences listed are
   probably not as strong as your copy of GPG supports, and often the stronger algorithms are
   not requested at all! You can change these preferences by calling the setpref command. I
   recommend something like:

   setpref AES256 CAMELLIA256 AES192 CAMELLIA192 AES CAMELLIA128 TWOFISH CAST5 3DES SHA512 SHA
   384 SHA256 SHA224 SHA1 RIPEMD160 ZLIB BZIP2 ZIP Uncompressed

   You may want to add other algorithms that your software supports, or you may want to
   disallow algorithms that you think are too weak.

   You can see that it worked by typing:

   showpref

   Check this very carefully. If everything worked right, you can quit, and you will be
   prompted if you want to save your changes:

   quit

   Note: You should then re-upload your key to a public key server and send it to the people
   you communicate with. Until people have imported your new key, they will still be using the
   old algorithms when encrypting to your public key!

   Warning: Note that the [72]OpenGPG Key Management document states:

     "When setting preferences, you should list the algorithms in the order which you'd like
     to see them used by someone else when encrypting a message to your key. If you don't
     include 3DES, it will be automatically added at the end. Note that there are many
     factors that go into choosing an algorithm (for example, your key may not be the only
     recipient), and so the remote OpenPGP application being used to send to you may or may
     not follow your exact chosen order for a given message. It will, however, only choose an
     algorithm that is present on the preference list of every recipient key."

   This means that if you're encrypting to several people at the same time, you can only use
   the strongest algorithm that the weakest person uses.

   Corollary: Don't be the weakest link in your group! If you are still using weak encryption
   preferences, you are bringing down the security of the entire group you're communicating
   with. You are not weakening the security of your own communications, but those of everyone
   you communicate with!

   Corollary: Inform the weakest links in your group that they could be using stronger
   ciphers. Point them to this section [73](Stronger Algorithms) of the documentation and help
   them fix it. Get their updated public key and help them test their preferences using
   showpref as described above.

   Corollary: [74]Update your keys often, so if someone on your keyring chooses to use
   stronger algorithms, you respect their preferences.

   Technical Note: You may be wondering how these encryption algorithms like AES are even
   relevant to you if you chose to, say, generate an RSA or DSA public key. RSA and DSA are
   public-key encryption algorithms, after all, and AES is a symmetric encryption algorithm! I
   thought we were using public-key encryption here! The answer is that decrypting an
   encrypted communication in GPG is done in two stages, with both public-key and symmetric
   algorithms being used:
    1. Public-key decryption: GPG uses your secret encryption key to decrypt a session-only
       secret key that was encrypted with your public (RSA or DSA) key.
    2. Symmetric decryption: GPG uses this session-only secret key to decrypt the "body" of
       the message which was encrypted using a symmetric algorithm like AES.

   Your public key (RSA or DSA) is only used for the first step. The actual body of the
   message is encrypted with a (faster) symmetric encryption algorithm, so it's important to
   make sure that you're using strong algorithms for both phases.

  Verbose Information

   You can use the -vv command-line option to gpg to give verbose output about what algorithms
   are actually being used. (Note that if you're pasting in decrypted text, after you're done
   pasting, you may need to send your operating system's "end-of-file" character. This is
   Ctrl-D in most Unixlike systems and Ctrl-Z in Windows-like systems.)

   gpg --list-packets can list the packets of any GPG file and give details on what's
   contained therein. This tends to output not-very-meaningful numeric data about which
   encryption algorithms were used, but you can decode these by looking at the specification
   for the Open PGP standard, [75]RFC 4880, specifically [76]Section 9.

   You can also use programs like [77]pgpdump to see what's included in a PGP message.

   Also see the [78]Automating GPG section below to see more options for dumping detailed
   information about what GPG is doing.

  Requiring Multiple Decrypts

   You can encrypt documents that require several people must cooperate to decrypt, by
   encrypting with multiple passes, specifying a different recipient each time. They will need
   to decrypt in the reverse order that you encrypted.

   TODO: Make an example, preferably one that writes no intermediate files (e.g. output to
   stdout using --output -) and doesn't make you enter passwords multiple times. Naïve
   versions make gpg complain with weird "broken pipe" errors and races in password entry.

  Hidden Recipients

   Sometimes you want to hide the recipients of your message from any snoopers. Normally, the
   key IDs of the recipients are part of the message. However, you can hide these by
   specifying --hidden-recipient recipient for each recipient you wish to remain hidden
   (instead of using the -r or --recipient flag to specify recipients.) The decrypting program
   will have to try all available secret keys to try and decrypt the message. (Hidden
   recipients' key IDs show up as all zeroes in the encrypted message.)

   The --throw-keyids command-line option is essentially the same as using --hidden-recipient
   for all recipients.

   There are other interesting options for hiding recipients in the [79]GPG key-related
   options documentation.

  Encrypting Messages You Can't Decrypt

   The section [80]Why Public-Key Encryption is Cool explains reasons that you might want to
   create an encrypted message that you can never be compelled to decrypt. This section
   discusses how that is performed.

    In GPG

   When you encrypt a message in GPG from the command-line, it does not encrypt to you by
   default! You would need to specify your own e-mail address as a recipient with the -r
   recipient@email.com option for you to be able to decrypt it.

   (See the [81]Manually Encrypting for E-mail section, including the warning, or the
   [82]Encrypting Files section, including the warning.)

   Thus, there's nothing to do when using gpg on the command-line other than remembering not
   to specify your own e-mail address as a recipient. (Note: You can change the "encrypt to
   self" behavior in your gnupg.conf file, so be careful if you've modified that.)

   This is why I encourage people to learn and use the GPG command-line for sensitive
   communications. Its defaults are usually safer than what your e-mail program exposes to
   you. See below for Enigmail (and its problems.)

    In Enigmail

   Global solution: You can turn off encrypting to yourself by default from the main
   Thunderbird menu: OpenPGP | Preferences | Sending and uncheck Add my own key to the
   recipients list. Warning: This means that you won't be able to decrypt any e-mails you send
   to anyone after this, until you re-enable this setting! This is a global, persistent
   setting, not a per-message setting!

   Per-message solution: Enigmail currently doesn't seem to support a good per-message
   solution. The only way to turn off signing to yourself on specific messages requires two
   steps:
    1. Turn off signing to yourself using the "Global Solution" above.
    2. Make Enigmail prompt you for recipients to encrypt to every time you send a message. To
       enable this, from the main Thunderbird window, select: OpenPGP | Preferences | Key
       Selection | Manually.

   Then, every time you send an encrypted e-mail, it will pop up a dialog which allows you to
   select which identities on your keyring that you are going to encrypt to. If you do want to
   encrypt to yourself (so you can decrypt and read that message later,) you'll have to
   manually select your own identity in the list. This is annoying. Note that if you don't
   perform step 1.) above, Enigmail will still encrypt to you even if your name is unchecked
   in the list!. Seems like a bug.

Technical Notes

   The rest of this document contains advanced technical notes. Please [83]send me more.

  Short key IDs are bad news

   As mentioned above, key IDs are usually specified as 8-character hexadecimal strings. The
   GPG program makes it sort of hard to see that your full key ID is actually a 16-character
   hexadecimal string. With only 8^16 (which is a bit over 4 billion) unique short key IDs,
   there is a probability that there are collisions of short key IDs in public key servers.
   That probability is 1, as we know collisions occur. (The probability is infinitesimally
   close to 1 in mathematical analysis.)

   With (at the time of this writing) over 3 million keys in public keyservers, (obtained from
   [84]the sks-keyservers status pages) there are likely many collisions. One would first
   expect to see a collision with only about 82,000 keys in the keyserver.

   The mathematics of finding the probability of collisions can be found in the Wikipedia
   [85]Birthday Attack article.

   There's more information in the interesting article [86]Short Key IDs are bad news (with
   OpenPGP and GNU Privacy Guard) which demonstrates real instances of key ID collisions.

   Summary: it's safer to publish your 16-hex-digit key ID than your 8-hex-digit one. Read on
   to find out how to find that ID.

  Finding your longer key ID

   By default, GPG only shows 8-hex-character key IDs when you do something like:

   gpg --list-keys eliasen@mindspring.com
   pub 1024D/B05676B1 2002-06-26
   uid Alan Eliasen (http://futureboy.homeip.net/) <eliasen@mindspring.com>
   sub 1024g/70AC29FB 2002-06-26

   You can change this to get long or short keys using the --keyid-format
   short|0xshort|long|0xlong option.

   gpg --keyid-format long --list-keys eliasen@mindspring.com
   pub 1024D/E48184B5B05676B1 2002-06-26
   uid Alan Eliasen (http://futureboy.homeip.net/) <eliasen@mindspring.com>
   sub 1024g/2A85C8AA70AC29FB 2002-06-26

   You can get your also 16-hex-character key ID in a more computer-parseable one-line format
   using the --with-colon option:

   gpg --fingerprint --with-colon your@email.com
   tru::0:1372973868:0:3:1:5
   pub:u:1024:17:E48184B5B05676B1:2002-06-26:::u:Alan Eliasen
   (http\x3a//futureboy.homeip.net/) <eliasen@mindspring.com>::scaESCA:
   fpr:::::::::402CC0D3D52713E3FB7C7103E48184B5B05676B1:
   sub:u:1024:16:2A85C8AA70AC29FB:2002-06-26::::::e:

   The public key is the line that begins with pub. You can automate the extraction with (on a
   Linux-like system):

   gpg --fingerprint --with-colon email@address.com | grep '^pub' | cut -d: -f5,10
   E48184B5B05676B1:Alan Eliasen (http\x3a//futureboy.homeip.net/) <eliasen@mindspring.com>

   However, read on to see a more common way to find the 16-hex-character key ID using only
   the fingerprint.

  Key IDs and Hash Algorithms

   You might not have noticed that your key ID is the final digits of the [87]fingerprint of
   your key. It took me a long time to realize that.

   A fingerprint is usually the SHA-1 hash of a key, which is 160 bits, or 20 bytes, or 40
   hexadecimal characters.

   Your short key ID is the last 8 hexadecimal digits of your fingerprint. Your long key ID is
   the last 16 hexadecimal digits of your fingerprint. So you can always find the long or
   short key ID if you have someone's full fingerprint, and use that long or short ID (or the
   full fingerprint!) to import from a keyserver.

  Enigmail, gpg-agent, and Gnome keyring bugs

   This section describes workarounds for Fedora Linux (and perhaps other Gnome and Mate
   environments) where Enigmail apparently remembers passwords forever, even if you don't want
   it to.

   I noticed that Enigmail never expired my gpg passphrase, even when I told it to expire
   after 2 minutes of idle time. Even worse, it would then automatically and silently decrypt
   PGP/MIME messages when I tried to view them, even though I told Enigmail to not
   automatically decrypt. That's dangerous.

   I thought this was related to gpg-agent, which sometimes handles passphrase input, so I
   tried putting the following into a new ~/.gnupg/gpg-agent.conf file to tell it to forget
   passwords after 60 seconds:

   default-cache-ttl 60

   However, that didn't work. I tried switching off "use gpg-agent for passphrases" in the
   Enigmail advanced preferences, but that didn't work either.

   After further research, I found out that the Gnome and/or Mate desktop environments were
   setting up their own GPG keyring daemons which just weren't behaving well. (These processes
   may be called gnome-keyring-daemon and/or mate-keyring-daemon. Note that this same process
   name may be controlling your ssh keys as well, so you may not want to kill them outright.
   Read on.) These can be turned off in Fedora's main menu by going to System | Preferences |
   Startup Applications| Startup Programs and unchecking GPG Password Agent: Gnome Keyring:
   GPG Agent and since I'm running Mate, also unchecking GPG Password Agent: Mate Keyring: GPG
   Agent. (There are probably lots of other things you might want to turn off in there.)

   Enigmail then wouldn't talk to gpg-agent usefully so I cut it out of the loop also. I
   disabled "use gpg-agent for passphrases" in the Enigmail advanced preferences. After that,
   Enigmail popped up its own gpg key dialog, and everything worked just fine, with Enigmail
   forgetting the passphrase after the specified time.

   Note that this may not work just fine if you're using gpg2, which may require the use of
   gpg-agent, so you may have to work harder to set that agent up correctly.

   Please let me know if you have better workarounds.

  Automating GPG

   If you're automating things, you can specify the password for encryption and decryption
   with the --passphrase password command-line option. Note that the password may get stored
   in your command history, will be visible in a process list, etc., so this is generally a
   Bad Idea. You can mitigate this somewhat with the --passphrase-file filename option. Just
   protect that file! Note: In gpg2 and possibly some versions of gpg, you will have to
   specify the --batch option for gpg2 to actually use those passwords or passphrases! It
   doesn't hurt to specify it in these cases. The --batch option also prevents gpg from
   popping up a password entry field or anything requiring human interaction.

   Signing a key with --sign-key still prompts you if you really want to sign, even with
   --batch and a passphrase, but you can add the --yes option to automatically choose "yes" to
   the prompts.

   The gpg program usually sends a lot of status information to standard error (stderr) but
   you might want that output directed elsewhere, or sent to a file. The
   --logger-file filename or --logger-fd filedescriptor will redirect that output.

   For more machine-parseable output, there's a status file that can be written using the
   --status-file filename or --status-fd filedescriptor options. This gives lines that
   indicate details of what was found in the message, what was tried, and the detailed status
   of each step. More details about this output can be found in the [88]Unattended Usage
   section of the GPG documentation.

   For more fun, here are some [89]Esoteric GPG Options that you may need to know to automate
   GPG.

   Read on to the next section to see how to specify where gpg stores its configuration files
   and keys.

  Making a Sandbox / Multiple keyrings

   Often, you'll want to experiment with GPG without actually making changes to your primary
   keyring. You can easily create a "sandbox" to make changes to a completely separate
   keyring. GPG looks at the GNUPGHOME environment variable to see where to read its public
   and private keys from. (On Linux-like systems this defaults to ~/.gnupg while on Windows
   it's stuffed away in the (possibly hidden) directories:

   C:\Documents and Settings\username\Application Data\GnuPG
   or
   C:\Users\username\Application Data\GnuPG
   or
   C:\Users\username\AppData\Roaming\GnuPG

   If you want to make multiple keyrings, set this environment variable before running your
   gpg commands. (e.g. in a Linux shell, export GNUPGHOME=/directory/of/your/keyring or in
   Windows, set GNUPGHOME=c:\directory\of\your\keyring and then subsequent commands in that
   shell will use your "sandbox" keyring.)

   Note that gpg will check the permissions on that folder and operations that call external
   programs (like connecting to a keyserver) will be disallowed if others can write to that
   directory. In a Unix-like system, you can fix that with:

   chmod 700 $GNUPGHOME

   For example, you can create a whole new keyring for automated processes:

   #!/bin/sh
   export GNUPGHOME=/directory/of/your/keyring
   # Following commands in this shell will use that home
   gpg --import file1

   Alternately, you can pass the --homedir dir option to gpg on the command-line with each
   command.

  Using Different Algorithms

   First, read the [90]Using Stronger Algorithms section above to see how to configure gpg to
   prefer that people use certain algorithms when sending to you. That section is probably
   more important than this one. It's far more important that you and the person you're
   talking to use the recommendations in the [91]Using Stronger Algorithms section above.

   GPG contains many different encryption and hashing algorithms. You can get a list of the
   included algorithms with the command:

   gpg --version
   gpg (GnuPG) 1.4.13
   Copyright (C) 2012 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
   License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
   This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
   There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
   Home: ~/.gnupg
   Supported algorithms:
   Pubkey: RSA, RSA-E, RSA-S, ELG-E, DSA
   Cipher: IDEA, 3DES, CAST5, BLOWFISH, AES, AES192, AES256, TWOFISH,
   CAMELLIA128, CAMELLIA192, CAMELLIA256
   Hash: MD5, SHA1, RIPEMD160, SHA256, SHA384, SHA512, SHA224
   Compression: Uncompressed, ZIP, ZLIB, BZIP2

   When manually encrypting, (either with public-key encryption or symmetric encryption,) you
   can specify an encryption algorithm with the --personal-cipher-preferences "alg1 alg2..."
   option and a digest/hashing algorithm using the
   --personal-digest-preferences "alg1 alg2..." option:

   gpg --armor --personal-cipher-preferences "AES256 AES192 AES" --personal-digest-preferences
   "SHA512 SHA256 SHA1" -r recipient1@email.address --encrypt filename

   You really need to know what you're doing to use these, though. See the [92]GPG
   Protocol-Specific Options page for more.

   Expert tip: If you really want to force the algorithm used, you can use the --cipher-algo
   name command-line switch for symmetric or public-key encryption. The
   --personal-cipher-preferences options above should be used if you don't want to
   accidentally violate the OpenPGP specification. You can use the --cipher-algo name argument
   if you know that your recipient has a modern version of GPG but doesn't have their public
   key set up well. Again, encourage them to improve their public key using the [93]Using
   Stronger Algorithms section above.

  Protecting your Secret Keys

   Warning: This section is somewhat speculative and may not help you really improve your
   security against a sophisticated attacker, but may help defeat some threat models.

   Your secret keys are, by default, encrypted with older encryption algorithms (CAST5) and
   hashing algorithms (SHA-1, iterated over 65,536 rounds). You can modify these preferences,
   though.

   You must use a strong password to protect your secret keys. This is the weakest link of
   your security. If someone is able to obtain your secret key files, they can mount a
   brute-force attack on it by testing many passwords in a dictionary attack. If you want to
   make it harder to perform a naïve brute-force attack on your secret keys, you can change
   the encryption algorithm and increase the number of rounds that are necessary to decrypt
   and validate your secret key. One way of doing this is to change the password for your
   secret key with something like the following:

   gpg --interactive --s2k-cipher-algo AES256 --s2k-digest-algo SHA512 --s2k-mode 3 --s2k-coun
   t 65000000 --edit-key keyID

   and then changing the password using the passwd command, quitting using quit and saving the
   changes.

   This forces your secret key to be encrypted with the AES-256 algorithm, SHA-512 hashing,
   and the mode is iterated and salted. The count means that the hash will be applied 65
   million times (which is about the maximum allowed.) This will greatly slow down the
   decryption of your secret key (it takes about a second on my computer, but that's rarely a
   problem,) which might significantly slow down attackers attempting to brute-force your
   password. Reduce the count if you need to decrypt many messages very quickly, as you will
   encounter a noticeable delay every time you decrypt a message!

   Technical Note: s2k is short for "string to key". This refers to an algorithm that turns a
   textual string (i.e. your password) into an n-bit number that can be used as a
   cryptographic key. (For example, AES-256 requires a 256-bit-long key. Your password is
   probably not that long, nor evenly distributed bitwise, so these functions try to turn a
   shorter string into a well-distributed longer key.)

   The more expensive that you make attacks on your secret keys, the better. This may not
   protect you against the highest-level attackers, nor will it prevent attacks directly
   against the symmetrically-encrypted parts of your message (see the [94]Using Stronger
   Algorithms section above to improve this,) but it will certainly discourage someone who has
   obtained your secret keyring and is trying to brute-force the password (say, by using the
   password-generating features of [95]John the Ripper and passing them into the GPG
   executable.) This will slow down the speed of password cracking by many orders of
   magnitude, which is often enough to make brute-force attacks greatly infeasible.

   More information at Christopher Wellons's excellent [96]blog entry.

   There is [97]some dispute if these particular options are the best, so do your research.
   For example, AES algorithms are designed to be fast, so a slower algorithm might actually
   be better if you're trying to slow down attackers.

   It is also possible that this could weaken your security if the hashing algorithm has fixed
   points or cycles, that is, values where the input to the hashing function equals the output
   from the hashing function. Extending the number of iterations may make it more likely that
   a fixed point or cycle is struck. (Read Donald Knuth's amusing anecdote about fixed points
   in his homemade random number generator in Volume 2 of The Art of Computer Programming
   about how easy it can be to strike fixed points. (Legal links, anyone?)) More research is
   warranted. Update: I did more research in the technical note below.

   Technical Note: I decided to do the math on this, to estimate the probability of a hash
   cycle or collision with highly-iterated hashing. If we can assume that the output of the
   hash function is approximately random with respect to the input, the mathematics of the
   problem reduce to an analog to the [98]Birthday Problem (that is, the probability that at
   least one birthday is shared by at least 2 people in of a group of n people.)

   The probability p of a cycle with n iterations and states states in the hash function can
   be estimated by:

   p(n, states) = 1 - e^(-n)(n-1)/(2 * states)

   Since the argument of the exponent is often a very small number, due to the number of
   states being very high, (2^128 for MD5, 2^160 for SHA-1, 2^512 for SHA-512,) we will have
   to use an arbitrary-precision exponential function and extended precision in many
   environments. Below is a [99]Frink program (a programming language that I wrote) that
   calculates the probabilities.

   use [100]ArbitraryPrecision.frink
   setPrecision[200]
   p[n, states] := 1 - arbitraryExp[((-n)(n-1)/(2 * states))]

   This function can then be called as follows (for the SHA-1 function with 2^160 states and
   65 million iterations):

   p[65 million, 2^160]
   1.445e-33

   Thus, we can derive the following probabilities of hitting a cycle in various hash
   functions, assuming they're close to random:
   Hash Function Bits Cycle probability in 65 million iterations
   MD5           128  6.2*10^-24
   SHA-1         160  1.4*10^-33
   SHA-224       224  7.8*10^-53
   SHA-256       256  1.8*10^-62
   SHA-384       384  5.4*10^-101
   SHA-512       512  1.6*10^-139

   Thus, the probability of seeing a random hash cycle with the SHA-512 procedure above are so
   low (given our assumptions!) that we can estimate that it won't happen in the lifetime of
   anyone on the planet living today, and we can proably safely assume that using many
   iterations, as noted above, will probably improve our security. QED.

   Note: I'm also running homemade programs that are attempting to find cycles in iterated MD5
   hashes. It builds a giant hash table of the last 100 million hashes it has seen, and will
   detect any cycle shorter than this. It's not likely I'll find one if the hashing function
   is designed well.

  OpenPGP Specification

   For details on the public OpenPGP specification, see [101]RFC 4880.



---
http://www.madboa.com/geek/gpg-quickstart/

   Most recent revision: July 20, 2011

   A quick gpg HOWTO for getting started with GnuPG.
     ______________________________________________________________________________________

   Table of Contents

   [8]Your Key
   [9]Encrypting a file for personal use
   [10]Encrypting a file for someone else
   [11]Decrypting a file from someone else
   [12]Detached Signatures
   [13]Basic Key Management
   [14]For further reading

   A colleague at work once asked me how to get started using gpg, the [15]GNU Privacy Guard.
   He had no experience with it at all. Here’s a slightly expanded version of what I told him.

Your Key

   Private and public keys are at the heart of gpg’s encryption and decryption processes. The
   best first step is to create a key pair for yourself.
    1. Generate a private key.
gpg --gen-key

       You’ll have to answer a bunch of questions:
         1. What kind and size of key you want; the defaults are probably good enough.
         2. How long the key should be valid. You can safely choose a non-expiring key for
            your own use. If you plan to use a key for public signing, you might want to
            consider a yearly expiration.
         3. Your real name and e-mail address; these are necessary for identifying your key in
            a larger set of keys.
         4. A comment for your key, perhaps to distinquish a key used for special tasks like
            signing software releases. The comment can be empty.
         5. A passphrase. Whatever you do, don’t forget it! Your key, and all your encrypted
            files, will be useless if you do.
    2. Generate an ASCII version of your public key.
gpg --armor --output pubkey.txt --export 'Your Name'

       You can freely distribute this file by sending it to friends, posting it on your web
       site, or whatever.
    3. You might also want to register your key with public keyservers so that others can
       retrieve your key without having to contact you directly.
gpg --send-keys 'Your Name' --keyserver hkp://subkeys.pgp.net

Encrypting a file for personal use

   Encrypting files for your personal use is quite easy.
    1. Encrypt a file called foo.txt. The argument to the --recipient option should be the all
       or part of the name you used when generating your private key.
# the long version
gpg --encrypt --recipient 'Your Name' foo.txt

# using terse options
gpg -e -r Name foo.txt

       The encrypted version of the file will by default be named foo.txt.gpg. You can modify
       that behavior using the --output (-o) option.
    2. Decrypt the encrypted file. You’ll be asked to provide the passphrase you used when
       generating your private key. If you don’t use the --output option, the contents of the
       encrypted file will be sent to standard output.
gpg --output foo.txt --decrypt foo.txt.gpg

   If you have an encrypted file that you think you’ll want to edit on a regular basis, you
   might consider using the [16]gnupg.vim plugin for transparently editing gpg-encrypted
   files.

   A more DIY approach can use make to automate the process of viewing and editing your
   encrypted file. Here’s an example Makefile (to use it, you’ll need to make sure that the
   leading whitespace in the targets is composed of Tabs, not ordinary spaces). The example
   assumes that foo.txt is the name of the unencrypted version of your file.
# example Makefile for viewing/editing an encrypted file
GPGID = you@your.address
FILEPLAIN = foo.txt
FILECRYPT = $(FILEPLAIN).gpg

GPG = gpg
RM = /bin/rm -i
VI = vim

all:
        @echo ""
        @echo "usage:"
        @echo ""
        @echo "* make view -- to see $(FILEPLAIN)"
        @echo "* make edit -- to edit $(FILEPLAIN)"
        @echo ""

edit:
        @umask 0077;\
          $(GPG) --output $(FILEPLAIN) --decrypt $(FILECRYPT)
        @$(VI) $(FILEPLAIN)
        @umask 0077;\
          $(GPG) --encrypt --recipient $(GPGID) $(FILEPLAIN)
        @$(RM) $(FILEPLAIN)

view:
        @umask 0077; $(GPG) --decrypt $(FILECRYPT) | less


Encrypting a file for someone else

   The really cool thing about GnuPG is that you can safely encrypt files for others using
   publicly available keys.
    1. Import your friend’s key, which you might have received via e-mail or on a floppy. If
       the file is named key.asc, then just use the --import option to add it to your keyring:
gpg --import key.asc

       That’s it! You can verify the import using the --list-keys option.
    2. Alternatively, you might be able to find your friend’s key on a public keyserver.
gpg --search-keys 'myfriend@his.isp.com' \
  --keyserver hkp://subkeys.pgp.net

       Here’s what a session looks like when someone searches for my key.
$ gpg --search-keys heinlein@madboa
gpgkeys: WARNING: this is an *experimental* HKP interface!
gpgkeys: searching for "heinlein@madboa" from HKP server
subkeys.pgp.net
Keys 1-5 of 5 for "heinlein@madboa"
(1)     Paul Heinlein <heinlein@madboa.com>
          1024 bit DSA key 8F54CA35, created 2000-11-10
(2)     Paul Heinlein <heinlein@ohsu.edu>
          1024 bit DSA key 8F54CA35, created 2000-11-10
(3)     Paul Heinlein <heinlein@cse.ogi.edu>
          1024 bit DSA key 8F54CA35, created 2000-11-10
(4)     Paul Heinlein <heinlein@teleport.com>
          1024 bit DSA key 8F54CA35, created 2000-11-10
(5)     [user attribute packet]
          1024 bit DSA key 8F54CA35, created 2000-11-10
Enter number(s), N)ext, or Q)uit > 1
gpgkeys: WARNING: this is an *experimental* HKP interface!
gpg: key 8F54CA35: public key "Paul Heinlein <heinlein@madboa.com>"
imported
gpg: Total number processed: 1
gpg:               imported: 1

       You’ll note that my key has four different e-mail addresses attached to it. That’s
       perfectly normal.
    3. Once you’ve got the other person’s public key, encrypt a file using it.
gpg --encrypt --recipient 'myfriend@his.isp.net' foo.txt

       You’ll end up with a file called foo.txt.gpg that you can send as an e-mail attachment
       or make available for downloading via ftp or the web.

Decrypting a file from someone else

   If someone sends you an encrypted file, the file has typically been encrypted using your
   public key. Decrypting it is no different than decrypting a file you’ve encrypted for your
   own use.
gpg --output foo.txt --decrypt foo.txt.gpg

Detached Signatures

   GnuPG can come in handy when you want to be assured that the file you’ve just downloaded is
   the one its creator wants you to have. The OpenVPN developers, for instance, release GnuPG
   signatures for all their [17]downloads.

   To verify a file using its detached signature, you must first have imported the signer’s
   public key. Assume we’ve downloaded crucial.tar.gz and the developers have also released a
   signature file, crucial.tar.gz.asc. Once you’re confident that you have the developers’
   public key in your local keyring, then the verification step is easy:
gpg --verify crucial.tar.gz.asc crucial.tar.gz

   Creating a detached signature is similarly easy. The following example will create a
   signature for your-file.zip called your-file.zip.asc.
gpg --armor --detach-sign your-file.zip

   People who have imported your public key into their keyrings can then verify that their
   version of your file is identical to theirs.

Basic Key Management

   After a while, you will probably have several keys in your ring. It’s easy to list them
   all:
gpg --list-keys

   Should you lose trust in or contact with a person with a key in your ring, you’ll want to
   delete it:
gpg --delete-key 'myfriend@his.isp.com'




---
http://www.slashroot.in/gpg-gnu-privacy-guard-tutorial-commandline-encryption-and-decryption

GPG-GNU Privacy Guard Tutorial (Commandline Encryption and Decryption)

   Submitted by [14]Sarath Pillai on Mon, 04/22/2013 - 19:34
   
   GPG Privacy Guard

   Communication through internet is always exposed to security risks of some or the other
   kind. Any message transmission done through TCP or UDP can always be intercepted with
   simple packet capturing tools to read the content inside.

   Many people are of the opinion that messages between two parties cannot be be intercepted
   without getting into the middle of their communication path. Although that is true till a
   certain extent, there are other things to consider where security is the main concern.
   Let's consider some cases where a possible security breach can happen.
     * What if the receiver's machine is compromised and an attacker has access to the data .
     * What if you by mistake, send the message to somebody other than the intended receiver.
     * How will you verify the reply that you are getting is unaltered.
     * What if an ISP that comes in between the sender and receiver is compromised and an
       attacker can intercept messages.

   In this tutorial we will be discussing GPG (GNU Privacy Guard), a very reliable method that
   can be used to encrypt,decrypt, and also authenticate data and messages send and received.

   GPG is open source, and is licensed with GPL(General Public License).  There are two types
   of encryption that can be used. One is symmetric encryption and the other is asymmetric
   encryption. In symmetric encryption the same key is used to encrypt and decrypt, Which
   means both the sender and receiver must have the same key. For symmetric encryption to
   work, the symmetric key(which will be used by both parties, and are used for encryption and
   decryption) must be shared.

   That poses another security risk. How will you share that symmetric key, because if an
   attacker gets that key, then the encryption is of no use. To solve this problem, asymmetric
   encryption was introduced(Public Key Cryptography). In asymmetric encryption Each and every
   user has two keys. Once is the public key and the other is the private key.

   If you want to send some encrypted data to a receiver in asymmetric encryption, then you
   need to have the public key of the receiver. And if the receiver has to send back some
   encrypted message to you, then he must have your public key. So the two parties engaging in
   communication must have each other's public key with them.

   Anything encrypted with the public key can only be decrypted with the corresponding private
   key(Which is kept securely and not shared at all.). Hence if you send some encrypted
   message to a receiver, with the help of his public key, then he only can open/decrypt that
   message, because he only has the corresponding private key. So the public key is shared to
   all those who can send messages to you, and you need to have the public key of theirs if
   you want to send encrypted messages to them.  The most interesting part of public key is
   that, even the sender cannot decrypt the message once he has encrypted it with the
   receiver's public key(Only the receiver can decrypt it with his private key.). Hence keys
   are always made as key pair.

   A public key is always constructed in relation to a private key. Let's see how this works
   in GPG.

   You need to have a package called  gnupg in Linux to work with gpg. Most of the Linux
   distributions have this installed by default. I will be showing this example tutorial with
   gnupg on Red Hat Systems.


[root@myvm1 ~]# rpm -qa | grep gnupg
gnupg-1.4.5-14
[root@myvm1 ~]#


   To secure the communication with the help of GPG, you need to first create a key pair. Its
   quite simple to create the key pair, but what's important to understand here is the fact
   that, which algorithm's are being used and what are the differences among them. We at
   slashroot, believe more in concepts than commands. Commands can be easily found by looking
   at the man pages or the documentation paper's, however concepts and to understand how
   things work requires an extensive research, and at times need to digg deeper to find that
   out.

   Let's create our key pair with the help of --gen-key argument in gpg command.
[root@myvm1 ~]# gpg --gen-key
gpg (GnuPG) 1.4.5; Copyright (C) 2006 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
This program comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY.
This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it
under certain conditions. See the file COPYING for details.

Please select what kind of key you want:
   (1) DSA and Elgamal (default)
   (2) DSA (sign only)
   (5) RSA (sign only)
Your selection?


   Now let's understand each and every option in the output. The --gen-key parameter provides
   you three options to select form. They each have thier own differences.

(1) DSA and Elgamal (default)

   This is the first option that you get while generating key pair in gpg. And its shown in
   there, that its the default option that will be selected. Which means if you just press
   enter during the selection, it will by default select the first option of DSA and Elgamal.
   Default key pair depends on the version of gnupg you are using, so it might vary from the
   example shown above, if you are using a different version of gnupg.

   This first option will create two key pairs. One DSA key pair and one Elgamal key pair.
   Here we need to understand something, before going ahead. DSA is only used for Digital
   Signatures.

   Digital signature can be used to check two things.
     * To verify the sender
     * To verify the message and confirm that it has not been changed/altered.

   A digital signature can be made with the help of a private key, and a signature can be
   verified by the corresponding public key. Normally the whole message/data, the sender is
   sending is never signed, because signing a whole message will increase the overhead.

   A better alternative to signing the whole message, is to sign the cryptographic hash of the
   message/data.

   Note: A cryptographic hash function is used to verify the integrity of the data, and to
   check that data was not altered. The main plus point of using cryptographic hash function
   is that, a hash will always be unique to a particular data. Altering any character in the
   data will produce a different hash.

   There are a number of hash algorithms that are being used. Among them DSA signing algorithm
   uses the SHA1 (and sometimes SHA2 due to security concerns involved in SHA1)

   The major plus point of a digital signature like DSA is that, nobody can forge the
   signature of anybody because that requires the private key. But yeah, anyone with the
   public key can verify the data that's signed.

   Hence selecting this first option of DSA and Elgamal will generate two key rings. One for
   encryption(Elgamal), and the other for Digital Signature(DSA).



(2)DSA (sign only)

   This second option will create only one key pair. This will be only used for Digital
   signature. So if you select the second option, you will be able to sign your documents
   before sending but you will be unable to encrypt it using gpg(Because this option does not
   create a public/private key for encryption. This will only create a publc/private key for
   Digital Signature.)

   Hence if you select this option, gpg will inform you that encryption cannot be done with
   this key pair, as a final message after the key creation. The message looks something like
   the below.
Note that this key cannot be used for encryption.  You may want to use
the command "--edit-key" to generate a subkey for this purpose.


(3)RSA (sign only)

   This third option will do the same thing, of generating keys for digital signature, by
   using another encryption algorithm called as RSA. Similar to the second option, you will
   not be able to encrypt data if you select this option, but will be able to sign your
   documents before sending.

   This option will create only one key pair, similar to the DSA (Sign Only) option. Hence you
   will get a similar exact same message after creating your signing keys with this option.
Note that this key cannot be used for encryption.  You may want to use
the command "--edit-key" to generate a subkey for this purpose.


Some facts about RSA, DSA, and Elgamal in GNUPG

     * DSA stands for Digital Signature algorithm, and is only used for signing the documents
       and not encrypting it.
     * DSA is based on a mathematical problem called as Discrete Logarithmic Problem(Which is
       difficult and time consuming for even powerful computer's to solve)
     * RSA algorithm can also be used for encrypting as well as digital signature's
     * Signature size of DSA is small compared to large signature's generated by RSA
       algorithm.
     * RSA works on a mathematical problem called as Integer Factorization Problem(Which also
       is difficult for computer's to solve).
     * DSA defaults to 1024 key size in GPG
     * You have a choice to select a key size for encryption using Elgamal algorthim ranging
       from 1024 to 4096 bits
     * The private key is the major component for decrypting and signing messages, which means
       you need to secure your private key with encryption and password protection, which is
       done bydefault by the GPG
     * Setting an expiry date for your private key is advisable, because it adds a little bit
       more security.


   Let's now generate our key pair by selecting the first option to understand the steps. Here
   we will be selecting the first option because we need to both encrypt as well as sign our
   data/message with the help of DSA algorithms.
[root@myvm1 ~]# gpg --gen-key
gpg (GnuPG) 1.4.5; Copyright (C) 2006 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
This program comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY.
This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it
under certain conditions. See the file COPYING for details.

Please select what kind of key you want:
   (1) DSA and Elgamal (default)
   (2) DSA (sign only)
   (5) RSA (sign only)
Your selection? 1
DSA keypair will have 1024 bits.
ELG-E keys may be between 1024 and 4096 bits long.
What keysize do you want? (2048)
Requested keysize is 2048 bits
Please specify how long the key should be valid.
         0 = key does not expire
      <n>  = key expires in n days
      <n>w = key expires in n weeks
      <n>m = key expires in n months
      <n>y = key expires in n years
Key is valid for? (0)
Key does not expire at all
Is this correct? (y/N) y

You need a user ID to identify your key; the software constructs the user ID
from the Real Name, Comment and Email Address in this form:
    "Heinrich Heine (Der Dichter) <heinrichh@duesseldorf.de>"

Real name:
Name must be at least 5 characters long
Real name: Slashroot
Email address: admin@slashroot.in
Comment: Slashroot Key
You selected this USER-ID:
    "Slashroot (Slashroot Key) <admin@slashroot.in>"

Change (N)ame, (C)omment, (E)mail or (O)kay/(Q)uit? o
You need a Passphrase to protect your secret key.

We need to generate a lot of random bytes. It is a good idea to perform
some other action (type on the keyboard, move the mouse, utilize the
disks) during the prime generation; this gives the random number
generator a better chance to gain enough entropy.
.++++++++++..+++++.+++++.+++++.+++++++++++++++++++++++++.+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++.>+++++.........................................>.+++++...
.....<.+++++....................+++++
We need to generate a lot of random bytes. It is a good idea to perform
some other action (type on the keyboard, move the mouse, utilize the
disks) during the prime generation; this gives the random number
generator a better chance to gain enough entropy.
+++++++++++++++.++++++++++..+++++.+++++...+++++..+++++.++++++++++++++++++++.+++++..+++++.+++++++++++
++++++++++++++++++++++++.+++++..+++++++++++++++.+++++.++++++++++>+++++...+++++.>+++++...............
............................>+++++...<.+++++>+++++.................+++++^^^
gpg: key 195C8BDB marked as ultimately trusted
public and secret key created and signed.

gpg: checking the trustdb
gpg: 3 marginal(s) needed, 1 complete(s) needed, PGP trust model
gpg: depth: 0  valid:   1  signed:   0  trust: 0-, 0q, 0n, 0m, 0f, 1u
pub   1024D/195C8BDB 2013-04-26
      Key fingerprint = 5C77 CEE6 10B9 5E1C 1B0D  B2E1 BB1D E5D8 195C 8BDB
uid                  Slashroot (Slashroot Key) <admin@slashroot.in>
sub   2048g/8BCCF604 2013-04-26



   In the above shown example of gpg --gen-key command, we have already discussed the first
   selection option for DSA & Elgamal,DSA,RSA.

   The second question asked by gpg is to specify the bit size for Elgamal key(Which will be
   used for encryption of data.). Its a widely accepted belief that if you use long size
   key's, then it will be difficult for a brute force to happen on that easily. However
   successful attack's against encryption key's happens due to human carelessness or some
   other social engineering means.

   Although longer key's provide some immunity towards brute force attacks, they themselves
   becomes a performance bottleneck while encrypting and decrypting data.

   To understand how key size matter's we need to think in terms of combinations and number of
   attempts that an attacker needs to carry out to do a successful break. 128 bit key means an
   attacker has to try  2 ^128  combinations. And a key size of 1024 means an attacker has to
   go through 2^1024  Combinations to do find the right match.

   Selecting the default 1024 will be fine here.

   The next option is to specify number of days, after which the private key will expire. Most
   people ignore this, and press an enter, in order to select the default "0" option which
   will not make the key expire.

   The next option will ask you to provide some identity information which will uniquely
   identify this key. Information asked will be email,Name,and a comment. Later on , you can
   select any of the information to identify the key which you want. This is very useful
   because you will be able to manage multiple keys, and can use the required key with the
   help of one single identify information you supplied.

   The final asked by gpg is to supply a password that will be used to protect your private
   key with encrypted security. If you want to use this private key, for encryption, you will
   be prompted for a password.



Encryption, Importing & Exporting Keys, Signing and verifying example's in gnupg

   We already have created key pairs for encryption/decryption & Digital Signatures. Now let's
   go through some real world example's to understand how this whole thing works.

   [INS: :INS]

   Let's first understand how digital signature in gnupg works, with some example signature
   creation.

   A digital signature is made with the help of a private key, and can be verified with the
   help of the corresponding public key. This is possible because public key will be
   distributed to all your recipients, by email or through website. A digital signature will
   not encrypt the data, but will add a signature with the hash value of the data, that you
   want to sign. The receiver can then verify the signature with the help of GPG or any other
   such application software.

   Let's first create some message and sign it, so that the receiver can verify that its send
   by you.  Suppose i have a message that's initially written in simple text format.
[root@myvm1 ~]# cat example-message
hello this is a test message to verify gpg signature. This message is from slashroot.in team, hence
it is signed with our private key, which you can verify with our public key.
[root@myvm1 ~]#


   Now let's sign that message with gpg.
[root@myvm1 ~]# gpg --local-user "Slashroot" --clearsign "example-message"

You need a passphrase to unlock the secret key for
user: "Slashroot (Slashroot Key) <admin@slashroot.in>"
1024-bit DSA key, ID 195C8BDB, created 2013-04-26


   In the above example method shown we have used the "Realname" argument we submitted while
   generating our key pair(In our case it was "Slashroot"). If you have a look at man pages
   for gpg, you will come to know that --clearsign, argument is used to make a signature of
   clear text format, which can be viewed with the help of any text editor.

   Signing the message will prompt you for a password, this is the password that you have used
   to encrypt the private key. As private key is the one, which you are using to sign a
   message, you need to give the password.

   Now as we have signed our message let's see how our signature looks like. After signing the
   text message, you will get a file with the extension of .asc, which will contain both the
   message and the signature. Let's see our example-message.asc file that contains the digital
   signature.


[root@myvm1 ~]# cat example-message.asc
-----BEGIN PGP SIGNED MESSAGE-----
Hash: SHA1

hello this is a test message to verify gpg signature. This message is from slashroot.in team, hence
it is signed with our private key, which you can verify with our public key.
-----BEGIN PGP SIGNATURE-----
Version: GnuPG v1.4.5 (GNU/Linux)

iD8DBQFRe2R1ux3l2Blci9sRAtd8AKCM6sN4Xg3aWLyOAiUza5HurxUU8gCfVlbw
wxI9ZZ2VnCY88SBR/e/xkfo=
=vBz9
-----END PGP SIGNATURE-----
[root@myvm1 ~]#


   The output clearly mentions that, the hash of the message, which we signed is using SHA1.


   Now as i mentioned earlier, the people who need to verify your signed messages will require
   your public key. For that you need to publish you public key and make it available to your
   recipients. This can be done by either sending to your preferred recipient through email,
   or you can also make it available for download in your website. But for this, you first
   need to export your public key in simple text format, so that other's can use it. Lets see
   how.
[root@myvm1 ~]# gpg --armor --output "slashroot-public-key" --export "Slashroot"



   In the above shown example, we have exported our public key to a file called
   "slashroot-public-key", which can be now made available to the recipients. In the above
   shown commands we have used --armor option with gpg command, to specify that the output
   must be in plain text format. And --export argument requires the identity of the key, which
   is again the Realname that we have used while generating the key pair(You can also use the
   email address provided while creating the keyring). Let's now see the content of our public
   key.
[root@myvm1 ~]# cat slashroot-public-key
-----BEGIN PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK-----
Version: GnuPG v1.4.5 (GNU/Linux)
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=fc8Y
-----END PGP PUBLIC KEY BLOCK-----
[root@myvm1 ~]#


   Any recipient who has this public key can import it to his list of public key's to verify
   our signed messages in future. Lets see how to import this public key.
[sarath@myvm1 ~]$ gpg --import slashroot-public-key
gpg: keyring `/home/sarath/.gnupg/secring.gpg' created
gpg: key 195C8BDB: public key "Slashroot (Slashroot Key) <admin@slashroot.in>" imported
gpg: Total number processed: 1
gpg:               imported: 1
[sarath@myvm1 ~]$


   --import option in gpg takes the public key you want to import, as an argument, and will
   have the exact identity of the real name, and email address etc. You can also use this same
   key identify for verifying signature's as well as encrypting messages.

   Let's see how to verify the message with this public key we just imported. Here for showing
   this example, we will be verifying our previously signed message example-message.asc.

   But before we verify any message with the newly imported key, we need to set a trust level
   on that key. Otherwise gpg will show you warning messages like the below.
gpg: WARNING: This key is not certified with a trusted signature!
gpg:          There is no indication that the signature belongs to the owner.

   For setting a trust level on a public key, we need to use the argument --edit-key.
[sarath@myvm1 ~]$ gpg --edit-key "Slashroot"
gpg (GnuPG) 1.4.5; Copyright (C) 2006 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
This program comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY.
This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it
under certain conditions. See the file COPYING for details.


pub  1024D/195C8BDB  created: 2013-04-26  expires: never       usage: SC
                     trust: unknown       validity: unknown
sub  2048g/8BCCF604  created: 2013-04-26  expires: never       usage: E
[ unknown] (1). Slashroot (Slashroot Key) <admin@slashroot.in>

Command> trust


   --edit-key argument with gpg command gives you a prompt, in which you can assign trust
   level to that public key. In the gpg edit prompt, you need to enter the command trust  to
   assign a trust level to that public key. You will be presented with 5 different level's of
   trust, from which we will be selecting the level 5 inorder to completely trust the key.
  1 = I don't know or won't say
  2 = I do NOT trust
  3 = I trust marginally
  4 = I trust fully
  5 = I trust ultimately
  m = back to the main menu


   After selecting the trust level, you can exit this key edit prompt by typing "quit". Let's
   now finally verify the signature with the help of this trusted public key which we have
   imported.


[sarath@myvm1 ~]$ gpg --verify example-message.asc
gpg: Signature made Fri 26 Apr 2013 10:39:01 PM PDT using DSA key ID 195C8BDB
gpg: Good signature from "Slashroot (Slashroot Key) <admin@slashroot.in>"
[sarath@myvm1 ~]$


   Let's finally send some encrypted messages with the help of slashroot public key we have
   imported, and then will try decrypting it with the help of the recipient's private key.

   For encrypting the message's with the help of gpg, you need to privide two command line
   arguments. One argument will specify the public key to use(This is done with the argument
   --recipient, because data will be encrypted with the recipient's public key.), and the
   other argument will take the file which will be encrypted using this public key.

   To encrypt messages to slashroot, we will be using Slashroot public key, which we have
   already imported.
[sarath@myvm1 ~]$ gpg --recipient "Slashroot" --output "sample-message.gpg" --encrypt "sample-messag
e"


   Now send this output file to the recipient by any method. On recieving the message
   (sample-message.gpg), the reciever can easily decrypt it, with his private key to view the
   content inside.

   Again this will require the recipient to type in the password, for his private key, because
   private key is used to decrypt this message.
[root@myvm1 ~]# gpg --decrypt "sample-message.gpg"

You need a passphrase to unlock the secret key for
user: "Slashroot (Slashroot Key) <admin@slashroot.in>"
2048-bit ELG-E key, ID 8BCCF604, created 2013-04-26 (main key ID 195C8BDB)

gpg: encrypted with 2048-bit ELG-E key, ID 8BCCF604, created 2013-04-26
      "Slashroot (Slashroot Key) <admin@slashroot.in>"
hello this a sample message to test gpg encryption.



How to send an encrypted email message with gpg by using plain text?

   In the above shown method of sending encrypted data to the reciever, we need to send the
   entire file. The main reason was because the encrypted file was in binary format.

   What if you want to send a complete email message as a simple text, but still encrypted.
   For this, we need to use the same --armor option,  we earlier used while exporting or
   making public keys available as plain text.

   So the first step is to type the entire email message in a text editor. Lets go through
   this example email message.


[sarath@myvm1 ~]$ cat sample-email
Hi,

This is a test email message to test encryption..

Thanks & regards

[sarath@myvm1 ~]$


   Now encrypt this entire email message with the recipient's public key, which in our case is
   "Slashroot".


[sarath@myvm1 ~]$ gpg --armor --recipient "Slashroot" --output "sample-email.asc" --encrypt "sample-
email"
[sarath@myvm1 ~]$


   The next step is to simply copy paste the content of "sample-email.asc", to the email
   message body(From any of your email clients like thunderbird,outlook, or even gmail etc.)

   The reciever can simply copy paste the email content to a text file and decrypt it to read
   the message, by the following method.


[root@myvm1 ~]# gpg --decrypt "sample-email.asc"

You need a passphrase to unlock the secret key for
user: "Slashroot (Slashroot Key) <admin@slashroot.in>"
2048-bit ELG-E key, ID 8BCCF604, created 2013-04-26 (main key ID 195C8BDB)

gpg: encrypted with 2048-bit ELG-E key, ID 8BCCF604, created 2013-04-26
      "Slashroot (Slashroot Key) <admin@slashroot.in>"
Hi,

This is a test email message to test encryption..

Thanks & regards

[root@myvm1 ~]#


   Again the reciever will be prompted for the password for his private key. In the above
   shown example, we have assumed that the reciever has saved the email content to a file
   called "sample-email.asc". The file name with which the reciever saves the content, does
   not matter at all. But yeah the entire content without mistake must be available.



   Rate this article:
   [Select rating]
   Average: 4.7 (3 votes)
   Rate
     * [15]Add new comment

Comments

[16]Outdated guide

   [17]Permalink Submitted by Sami Lehtinen on Fri, 05/03/2013 - 23:01

   1024 DSA keys aren't recommended anymore.
     * [18]reply

   slashmaster's picture

[19]Outdated guide (Reply)

   [20]Permalink Submitted by slashmaster on Sat, 05/04/2013 - 17:43

   Hi Sami Lehtinen,

   NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology) was the one behind the initial
   proposal of DSA algorithm. And they did release multiple revisions of this algorithm. The
   last revision was named FIPS 186-3 (which was released in 2009).

   United States Federal government recommends this algorithm for digital signature's. There
   are no reported evidence of a successful breakin against a DSA private key of 1024 size.

   The security of the key must depend on the secrecy of the key, but not on the size of the
   key. But yeah i do agree to the point that a higher size in key will make a brute force
   much more difficult and time consuming...But neither RSA nor DSA is insecure with a key
   size of 1024 bit, because both of them relies on mathematical problem's that are considered
   as complex and difficult to solve.(But yeah a 2048 key is more secure, simply due to the
   fact that it requires further more computing power and time to break)
