filename: howto_keeping-linux-clean_20151103.txt
http://freedompenguin.com/articles/how-to/keeping-linux-clean/

KEEPING LINUX CLEAN

One of the great things about Linux is how stable it is over time. The biggest challenge with Linux is
getting it installed, finding and configuring the software you need to get stuff done. Once you get that
accomplished, it pretty much just runs. There’s not much in the way of system maintenance you have to
worry about. Windows, on the other hand, is what I call a “dirty” system,in that it generates lots
and lots of extra data that it leaves on the hard drive as it runs. It’s notorious for slowing down
over time, as this data piles up and Windows users either have to install software to clean all of this
trash out or reload the system periodically to keep that freshly booted up feeling. There’s actually
a whole industry devoted to selling “cleaners” for Windows., Some of these programs are really just
malware in disguise but many are quite useful. Of course, the problem is figuring out which is which.

If you use Linux then you’re probably saying to yourself how glad you are that you don’t have to
deal with such nonsense, but don’t speak too soon. While Linux isn’t nearly as dirty as Windows,
it does benefit from a little dusting and cleaning every once in a while. Linux also generates data
as it runs in the form of logs, caches, and temporary files. This extra data doesn’t usually affect
system performance. The main reason anyone would want to clear this stuff out is to reclaim hard drive
space. If you’re running SSDs, that might be something you care about since solid state drives tend to
be smaller than what we’ve become accustomed to and we have to keep a close eye on the space we’re
taking up until the price for large capacity SSDs comes down a bit. Let’s go through a few things you
can do to tidy up your Linux box.

Removing Old Kernels
WARNING! Proceed with extreme caution when removing anything associated with the Linux Kernel! It is quite
possible that removing the wrong package could cripple or totally trash your computer! You have been warned!

Every distribution of Linux handles kernel management differently. Some have nice GUI tools that allow
you to choose what kernel to run like OpenSUSE, Linux Mint and Manjaro. Others very rarely or never
update the kernel, leaving it entirely up to the user to do manually. The kernel is pretty important and
having an updated kernel is one of the main ways you can keep your system safe from viruses and getting
hacked. I’m going to focus on Ubuntu here but I encourage you to do a bit of research on kernels and
learn how your distribution deals with updating them.

Ubuntu updates the kernel along with everything else on your system and it leaves the older kernels
behind. Every once in a while, a kernel update breaks something and it’s nice to have the older one
around so you can go back to it if you have to. The problem is that Ubuntu just leaves the old kernels
there and after a while you can end up with a bunch of them installed on your system. Kernels and their
associated files take up a lot of space – running into the hundreds of megabytes. Thus, removing old
kernels can free up a lot of space.

The best tool for managing the kernel in Ubuntu is Synaptic Package Manager. If it is not already
installed on your system, get it now. I show you how to do this in the video but let’s go through it
here as well. Before you open Synaptic, open a terminal and issue this command:
uname -r

You should get an output that looks something like this:
3.16.0-38-generic

This is the version number of the currently running kernel and you’ll want to make a note of it because we
want to make damn sure we don’t do anything thing to this kernel or any of the files that go along with it.

Now that we know what kernel we’re running, we can go on and open Synaptic and see if there are any
older kernels taking up space. To find the kernels, simply type “linux-image” into the search box
and then sort the list by the installed version. You can do this by clicking on the header in the package
list. Even if you only have one version of the kernel installed, you’re going to see a bunch of files
listed that are installed along with it. You don’t have to mess with taking them out individually
highlighting the main kernel image package and marking it for complete removal from the right click
menu will cause the system to remove everything associated with it. Be sure to double check the version
numbers to make sure you’re not removing the current kernel. If you’ve sorted the list by installed
packages, the latest running kernel should be at the top of the list. You can mark all the old kernels
now but before you click the apply button there’s one more package we need to look for.

Clear the search field and now do a search for “linux-headers.” If they’re installed, you should get
a list of all the installed Linux header files associated with the kernels installed on your system. The
version numbers go along with the kernel so just make sure you don’t remove the headers for your current
kernel. Actually, the header files are not necessary for day to day operation of your computer but they
are good to have around if you ever want to compile programs or drivers from source code. They don’t
take up much space so I always leave the headers for the running kernel on the system.

Using BleachBit
There are some really nice programs for Linux that will automatically go through the system and remove
extra files. The one I always go for is BleachBit. It’s been around quite a while and it’s available
on just about every distribution. I have yet to run into any issues with it removing something that has
broken anything on the system. BleachBit is lightweight but offers some pretty snazzy features. We’ll
talk about the very basics here but do take some time to learn more about what it can do because you
just might find some of the advanced features quite useful.

Once you install BleachBit, you’ll notice that you’ll find two entries for it in the dash
or the applications menu. One will allow you to run it as root and the other is for running it as
yourself. Running it as yourself will remove files that are associated with your account while running
it as root will remove things like cached packages and system logs. BleachBit also lets you clear caches
for web browsers, mail clients and plugins that might be installed on your system. Choose carefully here
because it will happily blow out all of your saved passwords and settings and while that might be good
if you want to clear everything, it might also result in unhappy users if you should run it on someone
else’s account. I find that just clearing the cache in web browsers reclaims a huge amount of space
while leaving the other settings intact.

Running BleachBit as root will let you use the APT cleanup commands to clear cached packages and updates
on your system. You cold use the clean, auto clean and auto remove commands in a terminal, but here
it’s all done for you. Speaking of the terminal, BleachBit is available there too. You can issue the
‘bleachbit’ command and it will run with the presets you setup with the GUI. This is nice because
it means one can create a Bash script to automate system cleanup.

Defragmenting Your Hard Drives
It has been said many times that one of the advantages to running Linux is that you never ever have to
defragment your hard drive. Well, this is not completely true. Most average users should never have to worry
about files fragmenting to the point where it affects the performance of their spinning hard drives. The
ext4 file system is very good at storing files in such a way that they do not fragment. Unlike the NTFS
file system used on Windows, ext4 spreads data across the entire drive, grouping similar files together
in such a way that there is plenty of space for them to grow without fragmenting. This means that as
long as you have plenty of free space on your hard drive you probably won’t get much fragmentation at
all. I have run systems for two or three years and checked the drives only to find that the fragmentation
score was ‘0.’

So why do I bother telling you about defragmentation then? Well, there are some situations where you may
need to think about it, like if your drive starts to fill up. Any spinning ext4 drive that’s more than
80 percent full is prone to start fragmenting files because it starts getting harder for the system to
keep files separated enough to ensure space to grow. Another thing that might cause file fragmentation
is if you have a whole lot of very large files. People who do a lot of video production, work with large
databases or virtual machines will end up with a bunch of very large files. These files can become very
fragmented over time and running defrag just may improve drive performance enough to be noticeable.

Open a terminal and issue this command to see if your system needs defragmenting:
sudo e4defrag / -c

Enter your password and the program will go off and analyze your file system. This can take up to a
minute if you have a lot of files so be patient. You should see output that looks like this:

now/best size/ext
1. /var/log/syslog 3/1 4 KB
2. /var/log/samba/log.nmbd 2/1 4 KB
3. /var/log/boot.log 2/1 4 KB
4. /var/log/auth.log 3/1 5 KB
5. /var/log/ConsoleKit/history 3/1 10 KB
Total/best extents 128413/128382
Average size per extent 41 KB
Fragmentation score 0
[0-30 no problem: 31-55 a little bit fragmented: 56- needs defrag]
This directory (/) does not need defragmentation.
Done.

The main thing we’re concerned with is the fragmentation score. It’s 0 in this case so we don’t
have to worry about defragmenting the drive. If you have your home folder off in its own partition, and
you really should, you would replace the / with /home to check on the fragmentation status there too. If
you want to go on and run the defragmentation program, just issue the command without the -c argument:
sudo e4defrag /

It will then go off and go through the files system defragmenting files that need it. There will be lots
of output scrolling by while it does this. This process can take a long time if you have a lot of files
on your system so you may want to turn it loose late in the evening just before you go off to bed and
have the system shutdown when it’s done. To do that, you could issue a command that looks like this:
sudo e4defrag / && sudo e4defrag /home && sudo shutdown -h now

What I generally do these days is go on and run the defrag tool after I finish setting up a new system
and transferring all the files to it. After that, I will occasionally check the status and I have found
that the fragmentation score pretty much stays at 0 from then on.

It’s worth mentioning that you should never ever attempt to defragment a solid state drive. As a
matter of fact, running the above commands on an SSD will usually result in a message telling you that
the operation is not allowed. Those of you who are using SSDs exclusively can just disregard this section.

One last thing: Don’t expect a tremendous boost in performance after defragging your drives in Linux
because ext4 is really good at being fast even if there are some fragmented files on the drive. Remember,
it was designed with high input/output file servers in mind and it’s very efficient. It doesn’t even
breathe heavy when it has to handle your laptop or desktop devices.

Don’t Obsess!
Some computer users get very obsessive-compulsive about keeping their systems pristine and running
at peak performance. Keep in mind that there are many Linux systems that run for years without doing
anything I listed above. Linux simply doesn’t slow down like Windows or Mac does, even after prolonged
use. The main reason you want to clear files is to reclaim drive space or to control the size of full
system backups. If you are one of those who like to try different distros all the time, you may never
end up having to do any of this, simply because you’re reinstalling so frequently. Still, it’s good
to know that these tools are there.

Have fun!


---
