filename: howto_getting-realtek-8188eu-wireless-adapters-to-work_20170206.txt
http://www.thelinuxrain.com/articles/getting-realtek-8188eu-wireless-adapters-to-work-in-linux-and-possibly-other-wireless-realtek-chipsets

Getting Realtek 8188EU Wireless Adapters to work in Linux (and possibly other wireless Realtek chipsets!)

By Andrew Powell, published 05/02/2017
     ___________
   Alright, so, disclaimer. This will likely be most suited for advanced or at least intermediate level
   Linux users. If you love NetworkManager, look away now, because we're going to obliterate it from the
   system. Unless, of course, someone works out how to make NetworkManager use the 'wext' driver. In
   which case, let me know!

   Having recently bought a TP-Link TL-WN725N Nano USB Wireless Dongle for my laptop, I encountered what
   seems to be an unfortunately common problem with these wireless dongles that use Realtek drivers,
   such as 8188EU, which mine uses. Like me, you'll probably plug it in, go to the WiFi chooser (such as
   the wireless network selector in GNOME) and... nothing will happen. The dialog box will just be stuck
   at "searching for wireless networks..." or something similar.

   Then you'll fire up a terminal, hit dmesg and see a bunch of spam relating to the wireless dongle,
   such as -
[ 1622.273368] R8188EU: INFO indicate disassoc
[ 1622.374408] IPv6: ADDRCONF(NETDEV_UP): wlp0s20u3: link is not ready
[ 1623.708779] R8188EU: INFO indicate disassoc
[ 1623.809643] IPv6: ADDRCONF(NETDEV_UP): wlp0s20u3: link is not ready
[ 1623.838688] R8188EU: INFO indicate disassoc
[ 1623.939751] IPv6: ADDRCONF(NETDEV_UP): wlp0s20u3: link is not ready

   And so on.

   dmesg will keep being spammed with this message so long as the dongle is plugged in and active, all
   the while that you WON'T get any networks show up for connection in your WiFi menu. A frustrating
   problem, to be sure, and seemingly one that has only happened in recent kernels, of say, the past
   year or two. As far as my Googling suggests, anyway.

The Problem
   The problem, as it turns out, is the wireless API driver for wpa_supplicant (the underlying
   background software used by the likes of NetworkManager) used by default which is the modern
   "nl80211" driver. The old school, now depreciated driver is known as "wext".

   However, depreciated or not, wext is the driver we want for these problematic Realtek chipsets such
   as the one found in the TP-Link TL-WN725N V2 dongle (RTL8188EU). I've heard of similar problems with
   "link is not ready" dmesg spam with other RTL8xxx series driven dongles too, so this is probably the
   same problem and worth a try if you're banging your head against a wall trying to get your dongle to
   work.

The Easier Way - Replace NetworkManager with Wicd
   [16]wicd is an alternative network manager for Linux with a decent amount of configurations, with
   both a CLI and graphical utility (wicd-gtk) available.

   It has support for both nl80211 and wext drivers, but interestingly, still uses wext by default.
   Which is exactly what we want here. First, let's kill NetworkManager, and I'm assuming we're using a
   systemd system here.
sudo systemctl stop NetworkManager.service
sudo systemctl disable NetworkManager.service

   Then we get rid of NetworkManager (just to be safe, though it may be sufficient just to disable it.
   Your mileage may vary). Adapt as necessary for your distribution.

   For Debian/Ubuntu-based systems:
sudo apt-get remove network-manager

   Or Arch Linux:
sudo pacman -R NetworkManager

   And so on.

   To be safe, let's also make sure wpa_supplicant is not running.
killall wpa_supplicant

   Then install and activate wicd:
sudo apt-get install wicd wicd-gtk wicd-curses
sudo systemctl enable wicd.service
sudo systemctl start wicd.service

   Look for the wicd utility in your applications, fire it up and hopefully... you get some networks
   show up in the list! wicd also runs as a tray application, which you may or may not love. You won't
   get any integration into something like GNOME's default network indicator folks. Though someone may
   well one day make a GNOME extension for that....

The Manual, More Hands On Way - Handle wpa_supplicant directly
   For those who love doing things a little more manually in the command-line, you can do away with
   third-party network managers like NetworkManager or wicd entirely and just go straight to the source
   program - wpa_supplicant - which will pretty much already be installed on any system that has
   wireless capability. First, disable/remove NetworkManager as above, then proceed to run the
   wpa_supplicant command as shown below.

   This is actually pretty simple:
wpa_supplicant -B -Dwext -c <(wpa_passphrase "ESSID" "PASSWORD") -i wlan0

   Obviously, substitute ESSID, etc, with your actual wireless network ID. It's also important to note
   that you'll want to run this in a proper root shell, as opposed to running the command with sudo, for
   reasons outlined on the [17]wpa_supplicant Arch Wiki Page.

   The -i switch in the command may also need changing, depending on the wireless interface your system
   has. It may well be wlan0, or it may be the somewhat less intuitive and memorable wlp0s20u3, or
   similar. Change as needed.

   The -D switch is also the crucial one here, as by issuing -Dwext, we are telling wpa_supplicant to
   use the wext driver.

   Finally, assuming wpa_supplicant has initialized the wireless adapter properly (if your dongle has a
   flashing LED like mine, by now you'll notice it blinking if all has gone well), we just need to get
   an IP address. For most of us it'll probably be by DHCP, so the lovely little dhcpcd command will do
   the trick.
dhcpcd

   And it will take care of the rest.

Houston, We Have Connection
   Whichever way you choose, at this point hopefully you'll have a working wireless internet connection!

   Simply open a web browser and try load a webpage, or issue a command in a shell such as ping
   www.google.com and you will quickly see if you have a proper connection.

   After loading the wext driver, you should see all the dmesg spam completely stop in relation to link
   not ready errors too.

   You may notice I never mentioned how to install the Realtek driver(s) in this article, such as the
   RTL8188EU driver that my dongle uses. It seems to be included in distros like Arch Linux and Ubuntu
   anyway, however, for a totally free software oriented distribution such as Fedora, you would need to
   download and compile the driver module manually. Let me know in the comments if you would like me to
   do an article covering this!

   Also, if anyone knows how to force NetworkManager to use the wext driver extension, let me know! At
   the moment it's the only real reason to get rid of it in this instance, as NetworkManager does as it
   pleases and ignores any configurations set for wpa_supplicant or any other overrides I've tried such
   as setting wifi-wext-only=true in /etc/NetworkManager/NetworkManager.conf.

   Somehow fix that, and we wouldn't have to commit NetworkManager murder =).
