filename: howto_download-yputube-videos_convert-to-mp3_miltif_20160112.txt
http://linux.about.com/od/howtos/tp/How-To-Download-Youtube-Videos.htm

How To Download Youtube Videos
Updated January 08, 2016.

This guide will show you how to download Youtube videos using Linux so that you can enjoy them offline.
There are many reasons for storing Youtube videos on your hard drive as opposed to leaving them on the
web and viewing them online.
If you regularly take the train to work or you travel by plane then you will know that internet access
is either sparse or not existent.
In addition to this if you are watching a series of training videos it is good to know that you aren't
reliant on the internet or the fact that the videos might be taken offline by the person who posted them
in the first place.

There are a number of tools available for downloading Youtube videos using Linux:

youtube-dl - Downloads Videos
ytd-gtk - GUI frontend for youtube-dl
clipgrab - Download videos
nomnom - Download videos
python-pafy - Download videos
minitube - Watch Youtube videos from desktop
smtube - Watch Youtube videos from deskto

In this guide I will be covering youtube-dl and ytd-gtk.
Download Youtube videos using youtube-dl is number 11 on the list of 15 Linux Commands That Will Rock
Your World.

Install youtube-dl From Ubuntu Software Centre -
Download Youtube Videos Using Ubuntu.
1.  Download youtube-dl
You can download and install youtube-dl by using the relevant package manager for your Linux distribution.
If you are using Ubuntu then you can install youtube-dl from the Ubuntu Software Centre (click here for
a guide).
Alternatively you can use apt-get as follows:
sudo apt-get install youtube-dl

The above command will work for all Ubuntu based distributions including Linux Mint, Elementary OS and Zorin.
If you are using Fedora or CentOS you can use Yum Extender (click here for a guide).
Alternatively you can use yum as follows:
yum install youtube-dl

If you are using openSUSE you can use Yast or zypper.

2.  Download A Video Using youtube-dl
Obviously before you can download a video you need to find the URL of the video you wish to download.
Go to Youtube.com and use the search facility to find a video to download.
Underneath the video there is a share link. When you click on the share link a URL appears.
Select the text using the mouse and press CTRL and C to copy the URL.
Within a terminal window type youtube-dl and paste the selected text by right clicking in the terminal
and choosing paste from the menu.

You should be left with something like this:
youtube-dl https://youtu.be/ICZ3vFNpZDE
GUI For Download Youtube Videos Using Linux -
GUI For Download Youtube Videos Using Linux.

3.  Download And Install ytd-gtk
To download ytd-gtk use the same tool that you used for installing youtube-dl.
You can use the graphical package manager supplied with your distribution such as the Ubuntu Software
Centre, Mint Software Manager, Yast, Yum Extender or Synaptic. Alternatively use the command line.

For Ubuntu (and its derivatives) type the following:
sudo apt-get install ytd-gtk

For Fedora/CentOS type the following
yum install ytd-gtk

If you are using openSUSE use zypper.

4.  How To Use The Youtube Downloader
You can start the youtube downloader via the command line by typing the following:
ytd-gtk &

(Incidentally the & at the end lets you run a process in the background meaning control is returned to
your terminal window).
Alternatively you can run the youtube downloader by using the menu system for your distribution.
For example you can access the Dash within Ubuntu and search for Youtube Downloader and an icon will
appear which you can click on to run the application.

The Youtube Downloader has three tabs:
Download
Preferences
AuthenticationTo download a video paste the URL of the video (use the method shown earlier for finding video links)
into the URL box and press the plus symbol next to it.
In the bottom right corner there is a download icon. Clicking this will start the download process.
A status message will show "In Progress" and a progress bar will appear.
You can create a whole list of videos to download by adding them one by one.
The other icons on the screen fulfil the following functions:
Refresh download
Pause download
Delete download
Move download up in queue
Move download down in queue
Clear list
Show/Hide link drop box

The preferences tab is very important because when you click the download link for the first time you
might get an error stating the requested format is not available.
The reason for this is that the default video output type in Youtube Downloader is Hi-Def. This format
isn't available on all systems.
The preferences tab allows you to change the output format to any of the following types:
Hi-Def
Mobile
flv 240p
flv 360p
flv 480p
mp4 360p
mp4 720p

In addition to changing the output format you can also change the output folder for the videos and supply
proxy account details.

The authentication tab lets you enter a username and password for Youtube.


---
http://linux.about.com/od/howtos/fl/How-To-Convert-Youtube-To-MP3.htm

Updated January 08, 2016.
In a previous article I showed you how to download Youtube videos using Linux via the command line and via the
graphical application ytd-gtk.

In this article I will show you how to download just the audio from a Youtube video.

Why would you want just the audio for a video?
I quite often listen to the Linux Action Show podcast. Personally I prefer to watch the video but when I am on
the road driving it isn't safe to watch videos but it is safe to listen to the audio version of the podcast.

Similarly by downloading just the audio from Youtube videos you can take the MP3 files and store them on your
iPod or other MP3 player and play them when on the road.
The best tool for converting Youtube videos to MP3 is youtube-dl.
You can download and install youtube-dl using the following commands:
Ubuntu, Mint, Zorin - sudo apt-get install youtube-dl
Fedora, CentOS - yum install youtube-dl
openSUSE - zypper install youtube-dl

Find the video you want to download by visiting Youtube and searching for it. Underneath the video there will
be a share link. Click on the share link and select the link that appears with the mouse.
Within the terminal window type
	youtube-dl --extract-audio --audio-format mp3 -l
	
and then paste the selected URL by right clicking in the terminal window and selecting paste from the menu.

The text in the terminal should look as follows:
youtube-dl --extract-audio --audio-format mp3 -l https://youtu.be/ICZ3vFNpZDE

What this does is download the video from Youtube as a video and then extract just the audio part to MP3.

You are left with just the MP3 file and the video is discarded.
If you want to keep the video as well as the MP3 file add a -k to the command as follows:
youtube-dl --extract-audio --audio-format mp3 -k -l https://youtu.be/ICZ3vFNpZDE

You will now be left with a MP3 and an MP4 file. 

There are other ways to download and convert videos from Youtube to MP3.
For instance there are a number of Chrome plugins which can be used. The upside to using an add-on is that it
is generally a one click process with no command line knowledge required.
One such add-on is called Youtube To MP3. This will place a little icon in the address bar when you can convert
a video to MP3.
Simply find the video you wish to convert and then press the icon. This takes you to http://www.theyoump3.com/
which performs the conversion. When the conversion has completed you can download the MP3 file.
There are similar add-ons available for Firefox.
Personally I think the youtube-dl tool is the cleanest solution. Not all of the add-ons in the Chrome store
and within Firefox are safe and many of the add-ons are supported by adverts.
If you like the youtube-dl command, here are another 15 linux terminal commands that will rock your world.
Learn how to run commands in the background, run commands at a certain time and how to download files from the
web from the command line.

When you have enough MP3 files you might want to read this guide to get the best out of Rhythmbox.



---
