filename: howto-find-out-hp-printer-serial-number_CLI_20151016.txt
http://www.cyberciti.biz/faq/linux-unix-howto-find-out-hp-printer-serial-number-command/

How To Find Out HP Network Printer Serial Number Remotely Using Bash Shell On Linux or Unix
by VIVEK GITE on OCTOBER 13, 2015

I manage a small network including couple of HP printers. Is there an easy way to access HP printer serial
number in the terminal on Linux or Unix-like system? How do I find the model, product, and serial number
on my HP printer using bash command line options?

There are many ways to get this information:
curl command - Standard tool to transfer data from or to a server.
Tutorial details
Difficulty	Easy (rss)
Root privileges No
Requirements	Unix shell
Estimated completion time	1m
hp-info command - Part of hp-toolbox software.
Printer Management Language to get information from the printer.
Use curl command to query HP printer for serial number

Most HP printers comes with an embedded web-server called HP HTTP Server. The web-server exposes the
following info:
Printer name and model
Printer Firmware number
Printer serial number

Examples
The curl command is available on Linux, Apple OS X, FreeBSD, OpenBSD, and Unix-like operating system. Let
us say your printer IP address is 192.168.1.100, enter:
curl -k -I https://192.168.1.100

OR
curl -I http://192.168.1.100

Sample outputs:

Fig.01: Query printer for serial number

In this sample outputs my printer details are as follows:
Printer name: HP Officejet Pro 8600
Printer model number: CM750A
Printer serial number: CN276BKXYZZZZYY
Printer firmware number: CLP1CN1516AR

hp-info command example
The hp-info command query a printer for static model information, dynamic status informtion, and CUPS
printer queue settings. This is part of HPLIP (Hewlett-Packard Linux Imaging and Printing). Itt is an
HP developed solution for printing, scanning, and faxing with HP inkjet and laser based printers in Linux.
$ hp-info

Sample outputs:

Fig.02: hp-info command in action

$ hp-query -n -d 'hp_device_name_here'

Sample outputs:
Fig.03: hp-query command in action
