filename: howto_video-terminal-VT-type-settings_20180228.txt
https://kb.iu.edu/d/acpy

What is a terminal type or terminal emulation, and how do I set it?
   Terminal type or emulation specifies how your computer and the host computer to which you are
   connected exchange information. You need to set your terminal type so that both computers communicate
   in the same way. Otherwise, your telnet, SSH, or terminal application will not have enough
   information to perform actions such as clearing the screen, moving the cursor around, and placing
   characters.

   The most commonly emulated terminal type is the Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) VT100 terminal.
   Most PC and macOS terminal emulation packages support this type.

   If the computer to which you connect does not automatically detect your terminal type, you'll need to
   set it manually. The procedure for doing so varies from system to system. Follow the steps below
   which pertain to your system.

Unix
   Note:
   To determine your shell, at the Unix prompt, enter echo $SHELL .

   On a Unix system, enter one of the following lines at your shell prompt, depending on the
   shell you use (be sure to capitalize the command correctly):
   Shell                Command
   csh or tcsh          setenv TERM vt100
   sh                   TERM=vt100; export TERM
   ksh, bash, or zsh    export TERM=vt100

   On some Unix systems you may be prompted for your terminal type upon login. Press Enter to accept the
   default choice if one is offered, or enter vt100.

Setting the terminal type permanently
   If you'd rather not type these lines each time you log into your account, you may add this line to
   the initialization file located in the home directory of your account. Consult the list below for the
   name of the initialization file for your particular shell:
   Shell    Login file
   csh      .cshrc or .login
   tcsh     .cshrc
   ksh      .profile
   zsh      .zshrc
   bash     .bash_profile

Other options
   Your communications software itself should offer you a number of other options, including whether
   your Backspace key should be set as "backspace" (ASCII code 8) or "delete" (ASCII code 127). For
   nearly all UITS hosts at Indiana University, you'll probably want your Backspace key to send a delete
   or rub-out character.
