filename: howto_write-a-good-program_20161103.txt

Writing a good program

---
http://www.cs.colostate.edu/~regelson/shared/basicprog.html
The basic steps in writing programs are:


* Write a problem statement for what you want to do
* Write an outline, if it is complex
* Write up a section in pseudo-code (English instructions)
* Write the section in the computer language of your choice (this is called things like source code or a
	program or a sub-program))
* Compile the program. This means use a program called a compiler to translate your program into
something the
	computer can understand (special numbers, often called machine code or assembly language).
*Run your program and see if it makes the computer do what you wanted.
* If not, fix the program, and compile and run it again.

The names of the compilers for the languages we will use in this class are:
* javac (for Java)
* perl (for perl)
*

---
http://www.dummies.com/programming/four-steps-to-take-before-writing-a-computer-program/
FOUR STEPS TO TAKE BEFORE WRITING A COMPUTER PROGRAM
 0470088702.jpg
RELATED BOOK
Beginning Programming For Dummies, 4th Edition

By Wallace Wang

Before you start writing a computer program, first take four critical steps to design it. By doing so,
you don’t waste time writing a computer program that doesn’t work or that solves the wrong problem
and isn’t worth trying to salvage afterward. With planning, you increase the odds that your computer
program actually works and performs the task that you want.

The following four steps are crucial to take when designing any program:

Identify the problem: What problem does your program solve? If you can’t clearly state what your
program does, you won’t know how to design it.
Identify the user: Who’s going to use your program?
Determine the target computer: Which computer do people need to run your program? Is it a Windows computer,
a Macintosh, a mainframe, a computer running Linux, a handheld Palm or Pocket PC, or a supercomputer?
Determine your programming skill: Are you going to write the entire thing yourself or get help from
others? If you’re going to get others to help you, which parts of the program are they going to write?
COMPUTER PROGRAMMING: IDENTIFY THE PROBLEM
Every program solves a problem. A tax return program solves the problem of organizing and filing your
taxes. A word processor solves the problem of writing, editing, formatting, and printing text. Even a
video game solves the problem of keeping people amused.

A program is only as useful as the problem it solves. Most programs simplify and automate an existing
problem, such as a money management program that simplifies organizing and paying bills instead of
using paper and an adding machine. The goal of any program is to make a specific task faster, easier,
and more convenient. The only way reach that goal is to identify what task your program is trying to
solve in the first place.

IDENTIFY THE COMPUTER PROGRAM’S USERS
If you’re the only person who’s going to use your program, you can pretty much make your program
look and act any way you want, just as long as you know how to make it work. But if you plan to give or
sell your program to others, you need to know who’s going to use it.

Knowing your program’s typical user is critical. If users don’t like your program for any reason,
they’re unlikely to use it. Whether the program actually works is often irrelevant.

By designing your program with the user in mind, you increase the odds that people use your program and
(you hope) buy a copy for themselves.

Even if you write a program that works perfectly, users still may ignore it because they don’t like
the way it looks, they don’t understand how to give it commands, it doesn’t work the same way as
the old program they currently use, the colors don’t look right to them, and so on. The goal is to
make your program meet your users’ needs, no matter how weird, bizarre, or illogical they may seem
(the needs — not the users).

DETERMINE THE TARGET COMPUTER FOR YOUR COMPUTER PROGRAM
After you identify the user, you need to know what type of computer the user intends to run the program
on. The type of computer that your program runs on can determine which computer languages you can use,
the hardware that your program can expect to find, and even the maximum size of your program.

If you’re writing a program to run on a Macintosh, for example, your program can take advantage
of sound, color graphics, a large hard drive, and plenty of memory. You may need to rewrite that same
program drastically, however, to run it on a smart phone with its limited sound capability, much simpler
color graphics, and limited amount of memory and storage space.

If you can copy and run your program on another computer with little or no modification, your program
is considered portable. The computer language that you use to write your program can determine its
portability. That’s why so many people use C/C++ — C and C++ programs tend to be more portable than
other programming languages.

DETERMINE YOUR PROGRAMMING SKILL
When designing any program, consider your programming skill. You may get a great idea for a program,
but if you’re a beginner with little experience, writing your program may take a long time — if you
don’t give up out of frustration first.

Your programming skill and experience also determine the programming language that you choose. Experienced
programmers may think nothing about writing entire programs in C or C++. But novices may need to spend
a long time studying C and C++ before writing their programs, or they may choose an easier programming
language, such as BASIC.

Some novices take the time to learn difficult languages, such as C/C++, and then go off and write their
program. Others take an easier approach and choose a simpler language such as Visual Basic so they can
create (and market) their programs right away. Don’t be afraid to tackle a heavy-duty language such
as C/C++, but don’t be afraid to use a simpler language such as Visual Basic either. The important
goal is to finish your program so you can start using it and (possibly) start selling it to others.

Many programmers create their programs by using a language such as Visual Basic and then later hire more
experienced programmers to rewrite their programs in a more complex language such as C/C++, which can
make the program faster and more efficient.


---
http://www.pcadvisor.co.uk/how-to/software/how-learn-write-computer-programs-3517275/

How to code: learning to make apps and software is easier than you think
There’s a strong demand for talented programmers right now and, since it’s the Year of Code, here's
how you can become an expert in coding.

By Roland Waddilove | 19 May 14
Share
Tweet
Send
Comments
Learning to code is easier than you might think
Learning to code is easier than you might think
How to code - year of code
There’s a strong demand for talented programmers right now and, since it’s the Year of Code, we show
you how you can become an expert
Coding – or programming - is everywhere and in everything around us. All computers run code: it’s
what makes them burst into life when the power is turned on and what makes things happen when an icon
or menu is clicked.
Code isn’t just for PCs: smartphones wouldn’t be nearly as smart without code for the operating
system and apps. Tablets require similar code, as do TV boxes from Sky, Virgin media and others. Websites
are powered by code (see How to build a website), even cars rely on code these days; enthusiasts use
this fact to boost an engine’s power by reprogramming it – there’s no need to even reach for the
toolbox. (See also: Responsive vs Adaptive - why a responsive website is best for your business.)
Learn to code - Tado thermostat
You can even control the heating in your home using a phone app and the phone (see Tado thermostat review),
app and heating are all powered by code. Someone has to write it, couldn’t it be you?
With so many smart devices, gadgets and internet services all requiring code in order to function,
there’s a demand for people that can code and a shortage of people that are really good at it. This
is the reason why the Government announced that this is the Year of Code and it has provided £500,000
to train teachers to show children how to become programmers.
From September 2014 all children from the age of five will be taught to program. Education Secretary
Michael Gove said “The new computing curriculum will give our children the skills they need to succeed
in the 21st century.”

The scheme was set up with the best of intentions, but it quickly ran into problems and one of the scheme’s
advisors, Emma Mulqueeny, quit after just one week. Its launch was a PR disaster and there were many
critical stories in the news (BBC and Guardian to mention just two). Jeremy Paxman quizzed Year of Code
director Lottie Dexter on Newsnight and she admitted that she and some of the other advisors couldn’t code:

The government has the right idea, though, and everyone should try coding. Not everyone will like it
or need it, but a few will take to it like a duck to water and will become the expert coders that are
needed. Do you have what it takes to become a coder? Why not try and see.
Content continues below
Millions of Americans Are Cancelling Netflix Cause Of This Site
How Finance Daily
Stop. Think. Connect.
CIO
The Most Addictive Game Of The Year! Play With 15 Million Players Now!
Forge of Empires
Ads by Revcontent
The Fizz-Buzz test
Coding is skill that takes a lot of hard work to master. If you think you can code already, try the
Fizz-Buzz test: Write a program that prints the numbers 1 to 100, except for multiples of three print
“Fizz” and for multiples of five print “Buzz”. If you’re good, you’ll have a finished and
working program in under five minutes. Start Notepad and create a web page that prints Fizz-Buzz using
JavaScript. The answer is at the end of the article on the next page - no cheating!
Introducing programming to children at school is essential if we are to fill the demand for skilled
programmers in the future and the earlier you start programming, the better you will be. Five-year-olds
won’t be looking for jobs for another 15 years though, so who’s going to do the coding in the
meantime? Could it be you?
Learn to code: Which programming language?
There are many computer programming languages and although some are similar, many are quite different. Some
languages are only used in certain niches and these are fairly easy to spot and to avoid. You don’t see
many programmers using Lisp, Forth, Prolog, Smalltalk or Fortran these days. Learning them is pointless
unless you are looking for a job in a niche that still uses them.
Programming languages can become popular for a while and then disappear. Pascal was once popular, but
isn’t used much these days. The only people using BBC Basic, Sinclair Basic, Z80 and 6502 machine code
are people writing retro games for Sinclair Spectrum and BBC emulators.
You should learn the most popular programming languages, but you must be aware that what is popular
this year might not be next year. Programmers frequently have to learn to program all over again when
some new language takes off. Earlier this year Facebook announced it had created its own programming
language called Hack because other languages could not cope with its billion members. If you want to
work as a developer for Facebook you need therefore need to learn Hack.
So which language should you learn? The best way to discover which languages are the most used is to
look at job adverts. Job sites have large numbers of listings and the most commonly requested skills
are for C++, C#, .Net/VB.Net, Java, PHP, and web technologies like JavaScript, HTML, SQL, Asp.Net and
others. Most jobs require knowledge of several programming languages and knowing just one won’t
cut it. Many job adverts are aimed at computer science graduates with degrees and this is typical:
“Graduate / Junior Software Developer - C# / ASP.Net / MVC / SQL Server / Degree.”
Learn to code: Programming for fun
You don’t need to be a computer science graduate to become a programmer and not everyone wants to do it
as a full time career. Learning to program can be fun and for some people it can simply be a hobby. It can
also be useful too and you might find yourself needing to tweak a web page or add some functionality to
a site, such as adding PayPal buttons so people can buy goods. A little knowledge of how to code for the
web can make it a lot easier to build a website. You don’t need to know how to build complete Windows
applications and simply recognising a few key commands and functions can provide sufficient knowledge
to tweak someone else’s code, such as a WordPress template. Although a site can be built by pointing
and clicking, knowing how and where to paste in the code for a PayPal button in the HTML or PHP of a
web page is really useful.
Occasionally apps for mobile phones are created by a single programmer working on their own on their
home computer. Flappy Bird, the most downloaded app for the iPhone in January, was created by Nguyen Ha
Dong in just a few days. It was rumoured to be earning $50,000 a day in advertising revenue but even a
quarter of this would be very nice.
Learn to code - Flappy Bird
See how easy it is to create a playable Flappy Bird clone at code.org

There’s a strong demand for talented programmers right now and, since it’s the Year of Code, here's
how you can become an expert in coding.

By Roland Waddilove | 19 May 14
Share
Tweet
Send
Comments
Learn to code: online tools which teach kids (and you) how to program
Coding with the languages and tools that professionals use is hard because you need to know a lot before
you can do anything, even just displaying the classic greeting, ‘Hello world’, on the screen.
Avoid pro tools at first and go to sites like code.org, which teaches coding to US schools. There is a
great Hour of Code link on the home page which everyone that wants to be a programmer should try. There
are 20 lessons and before each one is an inspirational video by Bill Gates, Mark Zuckerberg and other
celebs. Each lesson involves moving a character through a maze to reach a destination. Programming
statements are on jigsaw-like puzzle pieces that you drag and drop to snap together. Join the pieces in
the right order and it makes a program that you can run and watch.
code.org Learn to code
Try the Hour of Code and become a programmer in 60 minutes!
It is simple, graphical and entertaining for all ages. After your first hour of code, you can try some
of the other tutorials, such as An Introduction to JavaScript, My Robotic Friends, A Taste of Python
Programming, and Build Your Own iPhone Game. Everything takes place in a web browser window and nothing
extra is needed. It’s a great website.

There are many similar tutorials using the Hour of Code drag and drop puzzle pieces method and you can
create a modern Flappy Bird clone, or go back to gaming roots and recreate Pong.


Real programming is a lot harder than dragging and dropping the puzzle pieces and the next step to
becoming a programmer is to try some of the Codeacademy tutorials. It is still browser-based, but is more
realistic and there is a choice of HTML/CSS, JavaScript, PHP, Python and others. These are all popular
web technologies and are useful to learn. Each lesson has many parts and on the left of the screen are
instructions and help, in the middle is a text editor for entering code, and on the right is the output
area. This is closer to real programming.

There are other websites that take a similar approach and learn-c.org, learnpython.org, learnjavaonline.org,
learn-php.org, and learncs.org all have useful tutorials. There is explanatory text and at the bottom
of each web page is a code window and output window. You can click buttons in the tutorials to view the
code, then you can edit it on the page, and finally run it and see the output.
Content continues below
Millions of Americans Are Cancelling Netflix Cause Of This Site
How Finance Daily
Stop. Think. Connect.
CIO
The Most Addictive Game Of The Year! Play With 15 Million Players Now!
Forge of Empires
Ads by Revcontent

Basic was a popular programming language on home computers like the Sinclair Spectrum and BBC Micro in
the 1980s and lots of old programmers started on those. Basic isn’t used these days, but the language
was invented for teaching programming and so is very simple. Quite Basic lets you write and run Basic
programs in a browser window. There are example programs including the Mandelbrot Set, a recursive Towers
of Hanoi solution, Bubble Sort and more.
Learn to code - Basic
Basic reads almost like English, making it easy for beginners
Learn to code: Beyond the basics
There is nothing harder than sitting in front of a real programmer’s IDE (integrated development
environment) and creating a program from scratch. Interlocking puzzle pieces and guided coding tutorials
just aren’t the same.
If you want to really create software, a good place to start is with Microsoft Visual Studio. The Express
editions are free and there is one version for creating web applications and services, one for creating
Start screen apps for the Windows Store, and one for creating standard Windows desktop software. Many
programming jobs require knowledge of the technologies used in Visual Studio.
Learn to code - Visual Studio
Follow the links to the developer’s section at the Java website and you can download a Java development
kit that enables you to create Java software. Before tackling the real thing though, you should try Alice,
Greenfoot and BlueJ. These are simplified Java development environments that have been designed to teach
programming in a fun way to students. Java is designed to run everywhere so Alice, Greenfoot and BlueJ
work on Windows, Mac and Linux.
Learn to code: A JavaScript solution to the Fizz-Buzz programming test
Learn to code - Fizz-Buzz solution
You might also be interested in Codeacademy tutorials

---



*************************************************
