https://www.quora.com/How-do-I-make-progress-with-Python-Django
From Your Quora Digest
How do I make progress with Python Django?

Written Nov 4, 2015

When I was beginning as a Django developer, I ran into the same issue. I could program the same basic
functionality over and over, and in my case, since I had memorized the steps, I had deluded myself into
thinking I was a pretty good programmer. It wasn't until I went to my first interview and struggled to
answer a really basic question that the illusion of my understanding broke.

The interviewer asked: "How does Django work?" I knew how to edit the URL configuration, I knew how to
create views. I could create models and forms and manipulate data returned by each, but I didn't really
know how everything worked.

Here's how you get better:
1. Understand the basic flow of the web. There is a client and a server. For simplicity, your web browser is
the client and your Django app is the server. Your client (browser) sends a request to your server (Django
app) and then your server sends a response back to your client. A request always generates a response.

2. Understand the basics of the HTTP protocol. When your client sends a request, it can send some
important information with it. It can send a verb such as GET or POST, which tells your server what
kind of action you expect it to do. A GET request tells the server "get some information and give it to
me". A POST request tells the server "here's some information I'm giving you, please do something with
it". The server responds to your client's requests with an HTTP status. It can tell your client "OK,
here's the information you requested" (HTTP status 200 OK). It can also respond in other ways: "sorry,
I couldn't find what you asked for" (HTTP status 404 NOT FOUND) or "hey, you didn't ask in the right way"
(HTTP status 400 BAD REQUEST).

3. Understand the transfer of data via requests and responses. The client can send data in a request
and the server can send data in a response. Depending on the HTTP verb (GET or POST), the data is
typically sent in different ways. A GET request usually sends data in a query string as part of the URL
(e.g. /?search=something). A POST request usually sends data in the body of the request (via a form or an
AJAX call). Remember, a GET request is merely asking for information, while a POST request is asking the
server to do something with the data. The data needed in a POST request is usually a lot more complicated
than the data in a GET request, and therefore it cannot easily fit in a URL.

4. Understand how Django processes the client request. When Django receives a request from the client,
it matches the URL to a string in your URL configuration, and then it chooses the correct view to process
the request. It also parses the request into a special request object. Django places any data you passed
in as part of the request in a special dictionary, depending on what kind of request verb you used. If
you used GET, it takes query string parameters and turns them into a dictionary. If you used POST, it
processes the data from the request body and turns it into a dictionary. For example, /?search=kittens
yields {'search': 'kittens'} and you access that via the request.GET dictionary.

5. Understand how Django processes server responses. Remember, the server returns a response for every
request it receives from the client. At the very least, the response will contain an HTTP status. The most
basic Django response is the HttpResponse class. Returning HttpResponse() automatically passes an HTTP
status 200 OK. Remember, this means "everything went smoothly". You can also pass data in the response,
and it must be in string form. If you've seen the render() function, you should understand that behind
the scenes it is processing a template into a string and then passing that string into an HttpResponse().

What to Do Next
- Practice generating different types of client requests and server responses. Send AJAX requests using
JavaScript. Try different types of form inputs. If you really want to get advanced, try file uploads! Use
the built-in HttpRequest classes (e.g. HttpResponseBadRequest, HttpResponseNotFound, etc.) and also try
doing things like raising HTTP errors (i.e. raise Http404).

- Practice sending different types of data in your responses. Remember, everything eventually needs to
be a string. Practice using JSON or XML. You'll have to serialize Python data types into strings with
special Python modules (e.g. json).

- After you have mastered the request/response flow, focus your attention on data modeling and what
actually happens behind the scenes of the Django models/ORM.
