filename: last-command_display-specific-logins_20170830.txt
http://www.techrepublic.com/article/how-to-parse-the-linux-last-command-to-display-specific-logins/

How to parse the Linux last command to display specific logins
August 29, 2017

   Your data center servers are constantly being logged into. Here's how you how you can find who's
   trying to get in, at least on your Linux machines.

   Chances are, your data center makes use of Linux machines. That being the case, you're going to want
   to know how to keep tabs on those servers. Once such area you might want to regularly check is who
   has logged into a server and when they logged in. Fortunately, there's a built-in command to take
   care of that very task. The command is last and I'm going to show you how to make use of it so you
   can better understand who has logged into your machine and when.

The command
   Simply put, the last command displays a listing of the last users logged into a system. Users also
   includes reboot, so it's really easy to use this same command to find out when a system was rebooted.

   Last works with wtmp to retrieve login attempts recorded in the utmp file. Together this makes for an
   easy to use system to keep tabs on the historical data of who is (and has been) logged into a Linux
   machine.

   The basic command last will display every login attempt since wtmp started recording.

   Of course, you don't want to have to scroll through that massive amount of output. To that end, last
   offers a few options to make parsing the output a bit easier. Last understands the following
   arguments:
     * YYYYMMDDhhmmss
     * YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm:ss
     * YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm
     * YYYY-MM-DD
     * hh:mm:ss
     * Hh:mm
     * yesterday
     * now
     * today
     * tomorrow
     * +Xmin (Where X is a positive number)
     * -Xdays (Where X is a positive number)
     * -p - display the users who were present at the specific time
     * -s - display the state of logins since the specified time
     * -t - display the state of logins until the specified time

Usage
   Taking the above arguments, you could find out who logged in on a specific date like so:
last -p 2017-08-10

   The output of that command would show you who (if anyone) logged in on August 10, 2017.

   If you want to examine a range of time, that's possible as well, using the -s and -t options like so:
last -s -20days -t -10days

   The output of the above command will show us who had logged in from a range of 20 days ago up until
   10 days ago. In this case (running the command on August 29) that range of time would be
   August 9 through August 19.

   Logins from localhost and two other IP addresses are shown.

   What if you want to find out who logged in from yesterday up until an hour ago (from the present
   time)? That's possible with the command:
last -s yesterday -t -60min

   The output from the above command should be significantly smaller than our previous
   command.

   And that's pretty much how the last command works.

Keep it curious
   If you're curious about who is logging into your servers (and you should be), last is an easy means
   of sating that curiosity on Linux. For more information about last, make sure to read through the man
   page with the command man last.
