filename: make-and-apply-patches_20150603.txt
https://www.cocoanetics.com/2011/12/how-to-make-and-apply-patches/

How to Make and Apply Patches

   Sometimes you want to tell somebody how you fixed a problem in their code, but for some reason the
   code is not on github so you cannot send them a pull request. If you felt really smart then you might
   put the changes you made into an e-mail, like “in file1.m:102 you change it to x, in file2.m:54 you
   make change y”. Thought this doesn’t really help the developer you are trying to help. Even when
   following your change instructions to the letter it is a tedious and error-prone method of applying
   your changes. Thanks to [22]M. Douglas McIlroy, Adjunct Professor at Dartmouth Colleague – one of the
   early Unix pioneers – there is a better way. He invented the form of diff that we are using today to
   get the Difference between two versions of a file. And [23]Larry Wall who invented the patch command
   which can take a diff file and effectively apply it to files.

   Honestly I was afraid of using patch before, never having played with it. What you don’t know you
   fear…. but since you are reading this article I now finally did, so that I can explain its usage.

Making a Patch

   Let’s try with a simple text file first. file1.txt
Here's some text.
And a second line.
And a third line.
A fourth line.

   file1_changed.txt
Here's some text.
And a third line.
A fourth line changed.

   To get the difference between these files we just diff them:
   diff file1.txt file1_changed.txt

   This produces this output:
2d1
< And a second line.
4c3
< A fourth line. --- > A fourth line changed.

   We see that diff features each changed block with a sort of address. We removed line two, so we see
   that the d in 2d1 probably means deleted. And the c in 4c3 probably means changed. If a line was
   changed you first see the original line prefixed by a less-than, then three dashes and then the
   changed line prefixed by a greater-than. diff also has a -y flag that puts the changes side-by-side,
   which more clearly visualizes the changes. This kind of output is called the “normal” format. To be
   able to use the diff for patching this is missing some vital information, namely which file the
   changes belong to. For this purpose you have to use the “unified” format which you get with the -u
   flag. We also pipe the output into a new file.
   diff -u file1.txt file1_changed.txt > patch.diff

   This results in the patch file to have this content:
--- file1.txt   2011-12-25 12:17:30.000000000 +0100
+++ file1_changed.txt   2011-12-25 12:01:30.000000000 +0100
@@ -1,4 +1,3 @@
 Here's some text.
-And a second line.
 And a third line.
-A fourth line.
+A fourth line changed.

   You can see that has information about which files are involved. Also you have minus and plus
   prefixes. A minus with a plus following means that the line was changed. Just a minus means that the
   line was only present in the original, i.e. deleted. Just a plus means that line was only present in
   the modified version, i.e. inserted.

Let’s Patch

   Appling the patch we just created is very simple. If the current working directory contains both the
   patch and the to-be-patched file all we need is:
   patch < patch.diff

   You get an output telling you while files where touched. As soon as you have applied a patch, calling
   the patch command again with the same patch will get you a message about this giving you the option
   to ignore individual “hunks” which is what these blocks of changes are called.

Multiple Files

   For multiple files the process is only slightly more complex. Say you have a a folder “original” and
   a folder “changed” and the latter contains multiple changed versions of the files in the former. If
   you call diff passing a folder name instead of a file name then this causes diff to compare file1 in
   one folder against file1 in the second folder, exactly what we need. There are a couple of additional
   flags for diff that are of use in this case:
     * -r to recurse through all subfolders of the passed folders
     * -u to get the “unified format” output
     * -p prints the c-function a change was contained in
     * -N treats absent files as empty

   So we go into the folder where our “original” and “changed” folders are located in and do:
   diff -rupN original changed > original.patch

   With this patch file it is easiest if you just move into the root of the original and copy the patch
   there. Then you can apply it without any additional parameters. Even though the diff contains the
   original and changed path prefixes it figures out that you must have meant the file contained in the
   current working directory.
cd original
cp ../original.patch .
patch < original.patch

   There is one parameter of the patch command that you might need if the paths mentioned in the diff
   refer to a different folder structure than you have on your own machine. The man page of patch has
   this to say about -p:

     -pnum or –strip=num Strip the smallest prefix containing num leading slashes from each file name
     found in the patch file. A sequence of one or more adjacent slashes is counted as a single slash.
     This controls how file names found in the patch file are treated, in case you keep your files in a
     different directory than the person who sent out the patch. For example, supposing the file name
     in the patch file was /u/howard/src/blurfl/blurfl.c setting -p0 gives the entire file name
     unmodified, -p1 gives u/howard/src/blurfl/blurfl.c without the leading slash, -p4 gives
     blurfl/blurfl.c and not specifying -p at all just gives you blurfl.c. Whatever you end up with is
     looked for either in the current directory, or the directory specified by the -d option.

   When I saw someone use patch for the first time he totally confused me by claiming that -p is short
   for the “patch level” which – as you can see above – is utter nonsense. It is probably short for
   prefix and the long form of it –strip actually means something entirely different. It is essentially
   the number of slashes that are to be ignored, including the part of the path to the left of each
   ignored slash. A strip level of 0 does not modify the paths at all. A level of 1 ignores the path up
   to and including the first slash. Omitting the p parameter causes patch to ignore the complete paths
   and only look at the file names. If a patch without specified strip level doesn’t work then you will
   have to take a look at the patch file and figure out how much of the paths you need to ignore so that
   these paths fit with the situation on your own file system. In our example above (with the original
   and changed folders) we could have used -p1 to have patch ignore the relative paths, but it seems to
   do that by itself.

Creating Patches from Repositories

   Above we discussed one way to create diffs that can be used for patches by having two versions of
   your files in two folders and diff these two. This typically suites those people who have not yet
   warmed to the use of source code management systems (SCM) like git or Subversion. In an SCM you don’t
   have multiple copies of each file, instead you have only one current version of the source code in
   the project directory and all previous versions are somehow hidden from view, but can be retrieved.
   In git this versions are called “commits” in Subversion “revisions”. For the sake of trying it out,
   let’s create an empty Xcode project with a git repo. On the dialog where you specify the folder for
   the project you can set a checkbox to have Xcode also put it under version control. It is probably an
   oversight in Xcode but if you create the project like this the first commit is being done for you
   with comment “Initial Commit”, however there are changes to the project file adding a
   “lastKnownFileType” to the project.pbxproj – which is contained in the xcodeproj bundle – that causes
   the project file to show as modified if you do “git status”. To get to a clean starting state for the
   project I go to the folder where I created the project and do an additional commit.
cd ~/scmtest
git status
git commit -a
git log

   I have vi set up as my editor so on the file that opens from the commit I enter some comment and then
   ESC : w q to save and finish the commit. The git log now shows no uncommitted changes, two commits
   and two untracked files containing some user workspace settings which you probably don’t need or want
   in your repo. Now let’s modify some code. For this test I just added an NSLog into the app delegate
   file. What’s really interesting now is how to create a patch that contains the changes from our
   second commit to the current modified state of our working directory. Simple, really:
   git diff --no-prefix > diff.patch

   We need the option to omit the prefix because otherwise git diff adds an “a” and a “b” prefix in the
   paths which never correspond to actual paths. Of course you can also apply patches that still contain
   the prefixes if you use the -p1 strip level. Our patch now looks like this:
diff --git scmtest/DTAppDelegate.m scmtest/DTAppDelegate.m
index 7730864..795fa6d 100644
--- scmtest/DTAppDelegate.m
+++ scmtest/DTAppDelegate.m
@@ -20,6 +20,8 @@

 - (BOOL)application:(UIApplication *)application didFinishLaunchingWithOptions:(NSDictionary *)launchOptions
 {
+    NSLog(@"Hello World");
+
     self.window = [[[UIWindow alloc] initWithFrame:[[UIScreen mainScreen] bounds]] autorelease];
     // Override point for customization after application launch.
     self.window.backgroundColor = [UIColor whiteColor];

   You can see the inserted lines prefixed with plus, also there are a couple of lines of code before
   and after the insertion so that patch can find the place even when there have been other
   modifications to the file that changed the line numbers. A simple git diff always contains all
   modifications made on the latest commit. To test this patch we discard our changes and see that we
   ended up on the second commit.
git reset --hard
git log

   Then we apply the patch, we need a strip level of zero so that the relative paths are used as they
   are.
patch -p0 < diff.patch
git status

   After this patch we see that the changes appeared again. You can also create a patch between any two
   commits by specifying the commit identifiers as parameters. You can get the identifiers from git log.
git log
git diff 92cef602e685970e6d4316cd383217d39d169b89 ec24c6d3435a2ae9ddaabd76f958561e86f9f02e > b.patch

   Finally let’s also see how the same can be gotten from an SVN repo. Same technique:
svn status
svn diff > diff.patch

   Between two specific revisions the same is possible. Subversion numbers revisions incrementally
   instead of with identifiers as git does. So the command for the changes from a specific version to
   the next is this:
   svn diff -r 126:127 > c.patch

   Contrary to git the diff command for svn does not prefix the file paths, instead the revision info is
   contained in brackets after the files which is ignored by patch.

Conclusion

   Knowing how to create and apply patches is a great skill to have as a programmer. So the next time
   you find that you want to precisely communicate what changes you made in somebody else’s code you
   should send them a patch instead of an email containing line numbers and code fragments. And if they
   don’t know what to do with that, also send them a link to this here tutorial. :-) PS: AlBlue points
   out that on git your can also directly [24]send patches via e-mail. Those even include your commit
   messages and identity.
