filename: mem_understanding-linux-memory-usage_20140122.txt
http://techthrob.com/2014/01/21/understanding-linux-memory-usage/

[24]Understanding Linux Memory Usage: Free, Cached, Buffered, and Hardware

   Tue, Jan 21, 2014

   One of the key components of system resource monitoring is memory usage. Knowing how much
   RAM is utilized helps you judge whether you have too many programs open, or if you need an
   upgrade. Linux provides several ways of obtaining this information, but there are some
   details you should be aware of when you interpret the numbers.
   Monitoring Memory Usage: Tools and Utilities

   There are several ways to monitor memory usage in Linux. Utilities are available both via
   GUI and the command line; perhaps the most well-known GUI resources monitor is the one
   included with Gnome, appropriately named “gnome-system-monitor”. In Gnome, you can find
   this application under the “System” menu, in the “Administration” section, labeled “System
   Monitor”. This application will show you statistics on more than just memory usage; it
   gives you information on network, CPU, processes, and more.

   If you take a look at the memory graph, you’ll see that there are two lines: Memory and
   Swap. The memory line is your physical RAM; RAM is incredibly fast, and whenever possible
   the system will almost always use RAM before it goes to [28]swap, which is a part of your
   hard disk that is being utilized as memory. Hard disks (even solid state drives) are much,
   much slower than RAM, and therefore the system will avoid using swap unless it runs low on
   RAM. When someone says their machine is “swapping”, it means that they have run out of
   physical memory, and their computer has been forced to rely on swap, making it incredibly
   slow. This is one reason why adding memory to a computer can often provide a significant
   speed improvement.

   Note: If you’re interested in learning more about swap, I’ve answered both [29]“what is
   swap used for?” as well as [30]how do I manage swap devices? in separate posts.
   Showing memory statistics on the command line

   On the command line, the free command is used to show the system’s current memory usage.
   Here is an example of the free command:
pi@raspberrypi ~ $ free
             total       used       free     shared    buffers     cached
Mem:        448768     181752     267016          0      13424      80036
-/+ buffers/cache:      88292     360476
Swap:       102396          0     102396

   For a more readable version, free -m will show memory in value of megabytes (similarly, -k
   works for kilobytes and -g works for gigabytes):
pi@raspberrypi ~ $ free -m
             total       used       free     shared    buffers     cached
Mem:           438        177        260          0         13         78
-/+ buffers/cache:         86        352
Swap:           99          0         99

   You’ll notice that, like the Gnome System Monitor, we have information on both memory and
   swap; but, there are several numbers given for each item. Understanding these additional
   numbers is key to understanding how Linux uses memory. It’s also important if you’re
   considering adding memory to your computer; knowing what these numbers mean will help you
   gauge the performance improvement you can expect from adding RAM.
   Shared, Buffered, and Cached Memory

   Linux doesn’t just use RAM for running programs; it also uses RAM to speed up hard disk
   access. This is known as “caching,” and it greatly improves the performance of your
   computer. The more memory available and used for caching, the better your overall system
   performance. This is because hard disks are incredibly slow, and anything that can be
   stored in RAM instead will be accessed much faster. The free command tells us how much
   memory is being used by the system for caching in the “buffers” and “cached” fields.

   Buffers is the amount of memory that’s being used to keep filesystem metadata in RAM. This
   data is frequently accessed, and so keeping it in memory results in huge performance
   benefits.

   Cached is the amount of memory that’s being used to keep copies of actual files in RAM.
   When there are files that are constantly being written or read, having these in memory
   reduces the amount of times you need to operate on the physical hard disk; as a result, you
   can greatly improve performance by using memory for cache.

   Both of these values are determined dynamically by the Linux kernel, which generally does a
   good job at figuring out how much RAM should be used for each. But it’s important to note
   that if a program requires additional memory, the kernel will free up the memory being used
   for caching file data (“cached” memory) in order to store the program’s data. This is why
   the free command shows a the -/+ buffers/cache line; it tells you how much memory can be
   freed up for programs, if needed. Therefore, if you want to know how much memory you
   actually have free for programs, you’ll want to use the value for “free” in the -/+
   buffers/cache line.
   Checking memory hardware without opening the case

   Finally, sometimes you want to know how what size memory modules a machine has installed,
   or its upgrade capability, without physically opening the case. In Linux, this information
   is easily provided by the dmidecode command. dmidecode requires root, and has a rather
   lengthy output, so you’ll probably want to execute it as such:
   sudo dmidecode | less

   Scroll down or search for “Memory Device“, which is an entry for an installed DIMM. These
   entries look like this:
   Handle 0×0029, DMI type 17, 27 bytes
   Memory Device
   Array Handle: 0×0025
   Error Information Handle: Not Provided
   Total Width: Unknown
   Data Width: Unknown
   Size: No Module Installed
   Form Factor: DIMM
   Set: None
   Locator: DIMM1
   Bank Locator: BANK1
   Type: SDRAM
   Type Detail: None
   Speed: Unknown
   Manufacturer: Manufacturer1
   Serial Number: SerNum1
   Asset Tag: AssetTagNum1
   Part Number: PartNum1

   Here, you can see that the first DIMM in the first memory bank has no memory installed,
   where the following shows that DIMM zero in bank zero has a 1GB module installed (remember,
   computers tend to count from zero rather than one):
   Handle 0×0027, DMI type 17, 27 bytes
   Memory Device
   Array Handle: 0×0025
   Error Information Handle: Not Provided
   Total Width: 64 bits
   Data Width: 72 bits
   Size: 1024 MB
   Form Factor: DIMM
   Set: None
   Locator: DIMM0
   Bank Locator: BANK0
   Type: DDR
   Type Detail: Synchronous
   Speed: 333 MHz (3.0 ns)
   Manufacturer: Manufacturer0
   Serial Number: SerNum0
   Asset Tag: AssetTagNum0
   Part Number: PartNum0

   Finally, the Physical Memory Array section will give you the maximum amount of memory that
   your motherboard can support, as well as the number of physical slots (populated or not) in
   the system:
   Handle 0×0025, DMI type 16, 15 bytes
   Physical Memory Array
   Location: System Board Or Motherboard
   Use: System Memory
   Error Correction Type: None
   Maximum Capacity: 8 GB
   Error Information Handle: Not Provided
   Number Of Devices: 2
   Taking action on memory upgrades

   By using and understanding the information provided by free and dmidecode, you can
   determine whether or not you need a memory upgrade, and (if you do need an upgrade) what
   kind of memory you need to purchase for your system.

   In a later article, I’ll show you how to determine what programs are consuming the most
   RAM, and what you can do to improve the efficiency of the memory you already have
   installed.

   I’d love to know whether or not memory is an issue on your system; on older machines,
   there’s usually not enough memory to go around, but newer boxes tend to have more than
   enough RAM for most applications. How much memory do you have on your system? Are you
   running low on RAM, or do you have more than enough? Leave a comment below and let everyone
   know!
