filename: networking_10-more-quick-tips_20170509.txt
http://www.techrepublic.com/article/10-more-quick-tips-to-make-linux-networking-easier/
 
10 more quick tips to make Linux networking easier

   Networking with Linux can be simple and secure — if you know a few tricks. Here are a few more
   pointers to help admins knock out various Linux networking tasks with a minimum of effort.

   By Jack Wallen | May 4, 2017, 10:16 AM PST

   If you either work on a Linux desktop, or administer a Linux server, there might be times when
   frustration sets in over networking issues. Although Linux has made significant advances over the
   years, there are still instances where the standard troubleshooting or optimizations won't work. To
   that end, you need to have some tricks and tips up your sleeve to make your life easier.

   As an update to my original [62]10 quick tips to make Linux networking easier, I happen to have a few
   different tricks that I wanted to share with you. Hopefully one or more of these will assist you in
   either configuring, optimizing, or troubleshooting you Linux network woes.

1. Use static addresses
   If this is an option, I highly recommend it. Why? Control. With a static IP address you can configure
   multiple DNS addresses (more on this in a bit), hardware addresses, and set the network device to
   start at boot. More importantly, should your particular machine host a service that other computers
   or devices need to reach (which is often the case with Linux), you don't want to have to constantly
   be instructing those devices to use a different IP address. Static IP address configuration is set in
   /etc/network/interfaces.

2. Disable dnsmasq
   Once upon a time, you could open up /etc/resolv.conf and add specific DNS addresses and you were
   done. Your machine would use those configured DNS addresses for name resolution and everything would
   work swimmingly. Unfortunately, that is not always the case now. With Ubuntu (and its derivatives)
   there's a tool called dnsmasq which will always overwrite /etc/resolv.conf every time you boot or
   restart networking. To get around this, you have to comment out the dns=dnsmasq line in
   /etc/NetworkManager/NetworkManager.conf. Once you've taken care of that, restart the network manager
   (with the command sudo /etc/init.d/networking restart) and you should be good to go.

3. Use third-party DNS servers
   I know many will throw shade at this tip, but I've always been fond of using Google's DNS servers
   (especially over my ISP's). The two addresses to use are 8.8.8.8 and 8.8.4.4. Once you've disabled
   dnsmasq, enter those in your /etc/resolv.conf file and DNS will resolve like a champ. There are other
   third-party DNS server that can be used (such as OpenDNS). Which you choose is up to you.

4. hosts is not a DNS replacement
   Open up your /etc/hosts file. Do you have a long list of entries? If so, consider moving those to a
   separate DNS zone. This can avoid address resolution errors and make mapping local addresses
   significantly easier. Using /etc/hosts as a cheap imitation of DNS can cause issues when you start
   reusing addresses and forget to clean up that hosts file. If you do use /etc/hosts as a quick fix (or
   for testing purposes), make sure to remove those entries as soon as you're done. If you do have to
   retain a few entries in the hosts file, keep it to a minimum.

5. Get to know UFW
   Iptables is an incredibly complex system for the configuration of the tables provided by the Linux
   kernel firewall. For the average user (or even the average admin), iptables can be a bit
   overwhelming. To that end, there is Uncomplicated Firewall (UFW). UFW is a front end for iptables
   that strips away the complexity, such that anyone can configure the security of their system. Even
   better, there are a number of GUI tools that can assist you in working with UFW (such as GUFW and
   gui-ufw). The combination of UFW and a good GUI will have you securing your system(s) with ease.

6. Learn the ip command
   Although ifconfig has been deprecated, I still automatically turn to it when I need things like the
   IP address of a server. This is a habit I need to break. In place of ifconfig is the ip command and
   you would be well served to get to know its ins and outs. The ip command can be used to view
   information about an interface or configure an interface. It's pretty flexible and is only slightly
   more complicated than the command it replaced. For more information about ip issue the command man ip
   and read all about it.

7. Enable your disabled wireless
   I have run into this on a few occasions. Out of nowhere, wireless networking ceases to function.
   Turns out, for whatever reason, the wireless adapter has been disabled. There is a solution for this
   to be found in the rfkill command. Issue the command sudo rfkill list all; if your wireless adapter
   shows up as either soft or hard blocked, issue the command sudo rfkill unblock all and then issue the
   command sudo /etc/init.d/networking restart will bring the connection back up.

8. Skip NFS and use Samba
   You might be inclined to set up NFS to local file sharing. Don't. The NFS system requires you to have
   far too many ports open on your desktop or server. Instead, go with the considerably more powerful
   Samba. With Samba, you only are required to have a bare minimum of ports open, so security isn't
   nearly as big an issue. In fact, Samba runs on TCP ports 139 and 445 and UDP ports 137 and 138. For
   NFS you'll need UDP ports 111, 1039, 1047, 1048 and 2049 and TCP ports 111, 1039, 1047, 1048 and
   2049. Why open up the security holes when Samba does an exponentially better job of sharing files
   across a network (plus it works great with other platforms and can connect to Active Directory).

9. Get to know sshfs
   Speaking of remote folder sharing, there's a tool that should be considered a must-know for Linux
   administrators. That tool is sshfs, which stands for Secure Shell File System. With this command you
   are able to mount remote filesystems and interact with the directories and files found on that remote
   system as if they were on a local machine. By default sshfs isn't installed on most systems, but can
   be added with a command like sudo apt-get install sshfs. You first must create a mount directory on
   the local system and then connect to the remote filesystem (with a command like sshfs
   USER@IPADDRESS:/REMOTE/PATH/ /LOCAL/PATH). Once the remote filesystem is mounted, you can work with
   the remote path as if it were local.

10. Make use of encryption
   We live in a world where security is not something to be taken lightly. If you share sensitive
   information via email, find out what encryption options are available for your particular email
   client. For example, if you use ]Mozilla Thunderbird, install and learn ]Enigmail. If you use
   Evolution, take advantage of the built-in support for ]OpenPGP. Beyond email, you can also encrypt
   files and directories using a number of command line or GUI tools (check out
   "[http://www.techrepublic.com/blog/five-apps/protect-your-data-with-these-five-linux-encryption-tools/] )
   Protect your data with these five Linux encryption tools" for more information).

Your network, your tools
   Getting the most out of your network on a Linux machine doesn't require a degree in computer science
   or any given certification. With these tips (as well as the tips from the original piece), you should
   be able to have networking functioning like a champ.
