filename: pdfjam_manipulating-pdfs_20160404.txt
http://audaciousamateur.blogspot.si/2016/03/miscellaneous-quickies-manipulating-and.html

Sunday, March 27, 2016

Miscellaneous Monday quickies: manipulating and excising pages from pdfs

   So you've gotten, via inter-library loan, the pdf's you requested to aid you in researching
   the article you're writing. For purposes of putting them on your e-reading device, the form
   they're in is probably perfectly suitable. But what if you'd like to do other things with
   one or more of them, such as printing them out? There is quite a range of pdf manipulation
   tools that can help you put them in a form more congenial to such aims.

   One that I recently discovered, for example, allows you to "n-up" your pdf document, i. e.,
   to put more than one page per sheet of paper. Should you wish to print the document, this
   can help you lessen paper waste. The utility is called [4]pdfnup, and the relevant command
   for accomplishing this end is pdfnup --nup 2x2 myfile1.pdf myfile2.pdf. Presumably one
   could use 4x4 in place of 2x2 to get four pages per sheet instead of two.

   This utility gives results similar to [5]psnup, a utility I have used (and previously
   [6]witten about in this blog) in the past for making booklets comprised of multiple pages
   per sheet of paper, though pdfnup likely lacks the advanced collating options of psnup. But
   psnup involves greater complexity in that it operates on postscript files, which usually
   need to be converted to or from some other format.

   Getting back to the task at hand, should you wish to print out any of your pdf's with the
   aim of minimizing paper waste, you may well wish to eliminate extraneous pages from your
   document. In my experience, for example, inter-library loan pdf documents routinely include
   one or more copyright notice pages. Before printing such documents, I almost always try to
   exclude those pages--simple enough if you send them directly from the printer from a pdf
   reader. But what if you're taking the additional step of n-upping multiple pages per sheet?

   As it turns out, pdfnup is actually part of a larger pdf-manipulation suite called
   [7]pdfjam. And that suite enables you to not only n-up your pdf document, but to eliminate
   extraneous pages as part of the same process. To give an example, if you have a fifteen
   page document wherein the first and last pages are copyright notices that you wish to
   exclude from your 2-upp'ed version, you'd use the command
   pdfjam MyDoc.pdf '2-14' --nup 2x1 --landscape --outfile MyDoc_2-up.pdf.

   The meaning of the various command switches will, I think, be obvious.
   This is just a thin slice of the capabilities offered by just one suite of pdf manipulating
   tools available under GNU/Linux. I have used other tools such as [8]pdfedit, [9]pdftk,
   [10]flpsed, to good effect as well.

   LATER EDIT: I just discovered a new and interesting functionality of pdfjam; it can convert
   pdf's from a4 to letter format (and vice versa). The relevant command is pdfjam --paper
   letter --outfile out.pdf in.pdf

