filename: permissions_quick-tips_20190809.txt
https://fedoramagazine.org/command-line-quick-tips-more-about-permissions/

Command line quick tips: More about permissions

A previous article [***] covered some basics about file permissions on your Fedora system. This installment
shows you additional ways to use permissions to manage file access and sharing. It also builds on the
knowledge and examples in the previous article, so if you haven’t read that one, do check it out.

Symbolic and octal
In the previous article [***] you saw how there are three distinct permission sets for a file. The user
that owns the file has a set, members of the group that owns the file has a set, and then a final set is
for everyone else. These permissions are expressed on screen in a long listing (ls -l) using symbolic mode.

Each set has r, w, and x entries for whether a particular user (owner, group member, or other) can read,
write, or execute that file. But there’s another way to express these permissions: in octal mode.

You’re used to the decimal numbering system, which has ten distinct values (0 through 9). The octal
system, on the other hand, has eight distinct values (0 through 7). In the case of permissions, octal
is used as a shorthand to show the value of the r, w, and x fields. Think of each field as having a value:

    r = 4
    w = 2
    x = 1

Now you can express any combination with a single octal value. For instance, read and write permission,
but no execute permission, would have a value of 6. Read and execute permission only would have a value
of 5. A file’s rwxr-xr-x symbolic permission has an octal value of 755.

You can use octal values to set file permissions with the chmod command similarly to symbolic values. The
following two commands set the same permissions on a file:

chmod u=rw,g=r,o=r myfile1
chmod 644 myfile1

Special permission bits
There are several special permission bits also available on a file. These are called setuid (or suid),
setgid (or sgid), and the sticky bit (or delete inhibit). Think of this as yet another set of octal values:

    setuid = 4
    setgid = 2
    sticky = 1

The setuid bit is ignored unless the file is executable. If that’s the case, the file (presumably an app
or a script) runs as if it were launched by the user who owns the file. A good example of setuid is the
/bin/passwd utility, which allows a user to set or change passwords. This utility must be able to write
to files no user should be allowed to change. Therefore it is carefully written, owned by the root user,
and has a setuid bit so it can alter the password related files.

The setgid bit works similarly for executable files. The file will run with the permissions of the group
that owns it. However, setgid also has an additional use for directories. If a file is created in a directory
with setgid permission, the group owner for the file will be set to the group owner of the directory.

Finally, the sticky bit, while ignored for files, is useful for directories. The sticky bit set on a
directory will prevent a user from deleting files in that directory owned by other users.

The way to set these bits with chmod in octal mode is to add a value prefix, such as 4755 to add setuid to
an executable file. In symbolic mode, the u and g can be used to set or remove setuid and setgid, such as
u+s,g+s. The sticky bit is set using o+t. (Other combinations, like o+s or u+t, are meaningless and ignored.)
Sharing and special permissions

Recall the example from the previous article concerning a finance team that needs to share files. As you
can imagine, the special permission bits help to solve their problem even more effectively. The original
solution simply made a directory the whole group could write to:

drwxrwx---. 2 root finance 4096 Jul  6 15:35 finance

One problem with this directory is that users dwayne and jill, who are both members of the finance group,
can delete each other’s files. That’s not optimal for a shared space. It might be useful in some situations,
but probably not when dealing with financial records!

Another problem is that files in this directory may not be truly shared, because they will be owned by
the default groups of dwayne and jill — most likely the user private groups also named dwayne and jill.

A better way to solve this is to set both setgid and the sticky bit on the folder. This will do two
things — cause files created in the folder to be owned by the finance group automatically, and prevent
dwayne and jill from deleting each other’s files. Either of these commands will work:

sudo chmod 3770 finance
sudo chmod u+rwx,g+rwxs,o+t finance

The long listing for the file now shows the new special permissions applied. The sticky bit appears as
T and not t because the folder is not searchable for users outside the finance group.

drwxrws--T. 2 root finance 4096 Jul  6 15:35 finance


---
[***]
https://fedoramagazine.org/command-line-quick-tips-permissions/

Fedora, like all Linux based systems, comes with a powerful set of security features. One of the basic
features is permissions on files and folders. These permissions allow files and folders to be secured
from unauthorized access. This article explains a bit about these permissions, and shows you how to
share access to a folder using them.
Permission basics

Fedora is by nature a multi-user operating system. It also has groups, which users can be members of. But
imagine for a moment a multi-user system with no concept of permissions. Different logged in users could
read each other’s content at will. This isn’t very good for privacy or security, as you can imagine.

Any file or folder on Fedora has three sets of permissions assigned. The first set is for the user who
owns the file or folder. The second is for the group that owns it. The third set is for everyone else
who’s not the user who owns the file, or in the group that owns the file. Sometimes this is called the world.
What permissions mean

Each set of permissions comes in three flavors — read, write, and execute. Each of these has an initial
that stands for the permission, thus r, w, and x.
File permissions

For files, here’s what these permissions mean:

    Read (r): the file content can be read
    Write (w): the file content can be changed
    Execute (x): the file can be executed — this is used primarily for programs or scripts that are
    meant to be run directly

You can see the three sets of these permissions when you do a long listing of any file. Try this with
the /etc/services file on your system:

$ ls -l /etc/services
-rw-r--r--. 1 root root 692241 Apr  9 03:47 /etc/services

Notice the groups of permissions at the left side of the listing. These are provided in three sets,
as mentioned above — for the user who owns the file, for the group that owns the file, and for everyone
else. The user owner is root and the group owner is the root group. The user owner has read and write
access to the file. Anyone in the group root can only read the file. And finally, anyone else can also
only read the file. (The dash at the far left shows this is a regular file.)

By the way, you’ll commonly find this set of permissions on many (but not all) system configuration
files. They are only meant to be changed by the system administrator, not regular users. Often regular
users need to read the content as well.
Folder (directory) permissions

For folders, the permissions have slightly different meaning:

    Read (r): the folder contents can be read (such as the ls command)
    Write (w): the folder contents can be changed (files can be created or erased in this folder)
    Execute (x): the folder can be searched, although its contents cannot be read. (This may sound strange,
    but the explanation requires more complex details of file systems outside the scope of this article. So
    just roll with it for now.)

Take a look at the /etc/grub.d folder for example:

$ ls -ld /etc/grub.d
drwx------. 2 root root 4096 May 23 16:28 /etc/grub.d

Note the d at the far left. It shows this is a directory, or folder. The permissions show the user owner
(root) can read, change, and cd into this folder. However, no one else can do so — whether they’re a
member of the root group or not. Notice you can’t cd into the folder, either:

$ cd /etc/grub.d
bash: cd: /etc/grub.d: Permission denied

Notice how your own home directory is setup:

$ ls -ld $HOME
drwx------. 221 paul paul 28672 Jul  3 14:03 /home/paul

Now, notice how no one, other than you as the owner, can access anything in this folder. This is
intentional! You wouldn’t want others to be able to read your private content on a shared system.
Making a shared folder

You can exploit this permissions capability to easily make a folder to share within a group. Imagine
you have a group called finance with several members who need to share documents. Because these are user
documents, it’s a good idea to store them within the /home folder hierarchy.

To get started, use sudo to make a folder for sharing, and set it to be owned by the finance group:

$ sudo mkdir -p /home/shared/finance
$ sudo chgrp finance /home/shared/finance

By default the new folder has these permissions. Notice how it can be read or searched by anyone, even
if they can’t create or erase files in it:

drwxr-xr-x. 2 root finance 4096 Jul  6 15:35 finance

That doesn’t seem like a good idea for financial data. Next, use the chmod command to change the mode
(permissions) of the shared folder. Note the use of g to change the owning group’s permissions, and o
to change other users’ permissions. Similarly, u would change the user owner’s permissions:

$ sudo chmod g+w,o-rx /home/shared/finance

The resulting permissions look better. Now, anyone in the finance group (or the user owner root) have
total access to the folder and its contents:

drwxrwx---. 2 root finance 4096 Jul  6 15:35 finance

If any other user tries to access the shared folder, they won’t be able to do so. Great! Now our finance
group can put documents in a shared place.
Other notes

There are additional ways to manipulate these permissions. For example, you may want any files in this
folder to be set as owned by the group finance. This requires additional settings not covered in this
article, but stay tuned to the Magazine for more on that topic soon.

---

