filename: permi_special-permissions_new.txt
﻿What is UMASK and how to set UMASK in Linux/Unix?

UMASK(User Mask or User file creation MASK) is the default permission or base permissions given when a new file(even folder too, as Linux treats everything as files) is created on a Linux machine. Most of the Linux distros give 022(0022) as default UMASK. In other words, It is a system default permissions for newly created files/folders in the machine.

How to calculate UMASK in Linux?
Though umask value is same for files and folders but calculation of File base permissions and Directory base permissions are different.

The minimum and maximum UMASK value for a folder is 000 and 777

The minimum and maximum UMASK value for a file is 000 and 666

Why 666 is the maximum value for a file?
This is because only scripts and binaries should have execute permissions, normal and regular files should have just read and write permissions. Directories require execute permissions for viewing the contents in it, so they can have 777 as permissions.

Below are the permissions and its values used by UMASK. If you are a Linux/Unix user you will observe these are inverse to actual permissions values when setting up permissions to files/folders with CHMOD command.

 0 --Full permissions(Read, Write, Execute)
 1 --Write and read
 2 --Read and execute
 3 --Read only
 4 --Write and execute
 5 --Write only
 6 --Execute onlyadminadmin
 7 --No permissions
How to remember these and calculate the file and folder permissions?
Consider above values are inverse to actual permissions. Suppose your UMASK value is 0027(027).

For folder:
To calculate actual folder permissions from UMASK is done in two steps

Step1:Logical Negate the UMASK

Not(027) = 750
Step2: Logical AND this number with 777

777 AND 750 = 750
So actual folder permissions is 750 when its created. Owner will get full permission, group gets execute and write permissions and others no permissions

In other words and simple way..
We have to subtract 027 from 777 then we will get the actual folder permissions.

777 - 027 = 750
which is nothing but full permissions for the owner, read and execute permissions for group and no permissions for others.

 
For files:
To get actuall file permissions from UMASK is done in two steps

Step1:Logical Negate the UMASK

Not(027) = 750
Step2: Logical AND this number with 666

666 AND 750 = 640
For your understanding purpose we have calculated this below equation to get what actuall AND operator do.

110 + 111 = 110(6)
110 + 101 = 100(4)
110 + 000 = 000(0)
How to see default UMASK?
just type umask and you will get whats the default UMASK

umask
Output

0022
Some FAQ related to umask:

1)How to setup or change default UMASK for all the new users?
The UMASK value can be set in /etc/profile for all the new users. Open this file as root user and given the below line in the file.

umask 027
2)How to setup or change default UMASK for existing users?
For existing users you can edit ~/.bashrc file in their home directory. This should be done for all the users one by one or if the machine is having lots and lots of users then you can write a shell script for this.

3)I see people are using 0022 and 022 as UMASK, is there any difference between them?

There is no difference between these two, both indicates one and the same. The preceding 0 indicates there is no SUID/SGID/Sticky bit information set.

4)What is the perferred UMASK value for a system for Security reasons?

Prefered is 027(0027) for security reasons becasue this will restrict others not to read/write/execute that file/folder

5)I see umask value as 022 in my vsftpd config file? what actually this mean to world?

When you see 022 as umask value in vsftpd config file that indicates that users who are going to create files will get 644  and for folders its 755 respectively.

To know more about umask refer man pages and info pages.

man umask

info umask
Please comment at comments section for any queries related to umask.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

What is SUID and how to set SUID in Linux/Unix?
Dec 29, 2011
There are some other special permission apart from the normal file permissions read, write and execute which we set with chmod and chown commands. They are SUID, SGID, Sticky Bit, ACL’s, SUDO and SELinux etc for granular file/folder management by Linux administrator. In this post we will see


 
1)What’s SUID?
2)How to set SUID?
3)Where to use SUID?
What is SUID and how to set it in Linux?
SUID (Set owner User ID up on execution) is a special type of file permissions given to a file. Normally in Linux/Unix when a program runs, it inherits access permissions from the logged in user. SUID is defined as giving temporary permissions to a user to run a program/file with the permissions of the file owner rather that the user who is running it. In simple words users will get file owner’s permissions as well as owner UID and GID when executing a file/program/command.

The above sentence is bit tricky and should be explained in-depth with examples.

Learn SUID with examples:
Example1: passwd command

When we try to change our password we will use passwd command which is owned by root. This passwd command file will try to edit some system config files such as /etc/passwd, /etc/shadow etc when we try to change our password. Some of these files cannot be opened or viewed by normal user only root user will have permissions. So if we try to remove SUID and give full permissions to this passwd command file it cannot open other files such as /etc/shadow file to update the changes and we will get permission denied error or some other error when tried to execute passwd command. So passwd command is set with SUID to give root user permissions to normal user so that it can update /etc/shadow and other files.

Example2: ping command

Similarly if we take ping command, when we have to execute this command internally it should open socket files and open ports in order to send IP packets and receive IP packets to remote server. Normal users don’t have permissions to open socket files and open ports. So SUID bit is set on this file/command so that whoever executes this will get owner (Root user’s) permissions to them when executing this command. So when this command start executing it will inherit root user permissions to this normal user and opens require socket files and ports.

Example3: crontab and at command.

When scheduling the jobs by using crontab or at command it is obvious to edit some of the crontab related configuration files located in /etc which are not writable for normal users. So crontab/at commands are set with SUID in-order to write some data.

How can I setup SUID for a file?
SUID can be set in two ways

1) Symbolic way(s, Stands for Set) 
2) Numerical/octal way(4)
Use chmod command to set SUID on file: file1.txt

Symbolic way:

chmod u+s file1.txt

 
Here owner permission execute bit is set to SUID with +s

Numerical way:

chmod 4750 file1.txt
Here in 4750, 4 indicates SUID bit set, 7 for full permissions for owner, 5 for write and execute permissions for group, and no permissions for others.

How can I check if a file is set with SUID bit or not?

Use ls –l to check if the x in owner permissions field is replaced by s or S

For example: file1.txt listing before and after SUID set

Before SUID set:

ls -l

total 8

-rwxr--r-- 1 xyz xyzgroup 148 Dec 22 03:46 file1.txt
After SUID set:

ls -l

total 8

-rwsr--r-- 1 xyz xyzgroup 148 Dec 22 03:46 file1.txt
Some FAQ’s related to SUID:
A) Where is SUID used?

1) Where root login is required to execute some commands/programs/scripts.

2) Where you don’t want to give credentials of a particular user and but want to run some programs as the owner.

3) Where you don’t want to use SUDO command but want to give execute permission for a file/script etc.

B) I am seeing “S” I.e. Capital “s” in the file permissions, what’s that?

After setting SUID to a file/folder if you see ‘S’ in the file permission area that indicates that the file/folder does not have executable permissions for that user on that particular file/folder.

For example see below example

chmod u+s file1.txt

ls -l
-rwSrwxr-x 1 surendra surendra 0 Dec 27 11:24 file1.txt
If you want to convert this S to s then add executable permissions to this file as show below

chmod u+x file1.txt
ls -l
-rwsrwxr-x 1 surendra surendra 0 Dec 5 11:24 file1.txt
you should see a smaller ‘s’ in the executable permission position now.

SUID with execute permissions:


SUID with out execute permissions:



C) How can I find all the SUID set files in Linux/Unix.

find / -perm +4000

The above find command will check all the files which is set with SUID bit(4000).

D) Can I set SUID for folders?

Yes, you can if its required(you should remember one thing, that Linux treats everything as a file)

E) What is SUID numerical value?

It has the value 4.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

What is SGID and how to set SGID in Linux?
Dec 30, 2011
This is next to SUID in our ongoing Linux file and folder permissions series. We already discussed about CHMOD, UMASK, CHOWN, CHGRP, SUID, StickyBit and SUDO  concepts in our previous posts. In this post we will see


 
What is SGID?

Why we require SGID?

Where we are going to implement SGID?

How to implement SGID in Linux?

 

What is SGID?
SGID (Set Group ID up on execution) is a special type of file permissions given to a file/folder. Normally in Linux/Unix when a program runs, it inherits access permissions from the logged in user. SGID is defined as giving temporary permissions to a user to run a program/file with the permissions of the file group permissions to become member of that group to execute the file. In simple words users will get file Group’s permissions when executing a Folder/file/program/command.

SGID is similar to SUID. The difference between both is that SUID assumes owner of the file permissions and SGID assumes group’s permissions when executing a file instead of logged in user inherit permissions.

Learn SGID with examples:
Example: Linux Group quota implementation

When implementing Linux Group quota for group of people SGID plays an important role in checking the quota timer. SGID bit set on folder is used to change their inherit permissions to group’s permissions to make it as single user who is dumping data. So that group members whoever dumps the data the data will be written with group permissions and in turn quota will be reduced centrally for all the users. For clear understanding of this you have to implement group quota from the above link. Without implementation of SGID the quota will not be effective.

How can I setup SGID for a file?
SGID can be set in two ways

1) Symbolic way (s)

2) Numerical/octal way (2, SGID bit as value 2)
Use chmod command to set SGID on file: file1.txt

 
Symbolic way:

chmod g+s file1.txt
Let me explain above command we are setting SGID(+s) to group who owns this file.

Numerical way:

chmod 2750 file1.txt
Here in 2750, 2 indicates SGID bitset, 7 for full permissions for owner, 5 for write and execute permissions for group, and no permissions for others.

How can I check if a file is set with SGID bit or not?

Use ls –l to check if the x in group permissions field is replaced by s or S

For example: file1.txt listing before and after SGID set

Before SGID set:

ls -l

total 8

-rwxr--r-- 1 xyz xyzgroup 148 Dec 22 03:46 file1.txt
After SGID set:

ls -l

total 8

-rwxr-sr-- 1 xyz xyzgroup 148 Dec 22 03:46 file1.txt
Some FAQ’s related to SGID:

Where is SUID used?

1) When implementing Linux group disk quota.

I am seeing “S” ie Capital s in the file permissions, what’s that?

After setting SUID or SGID to a file/folder if you see ‘S’ in the file permission area that indicates that the file/folder does not have executable permissions for that user or group on that particular file/folder.

chmod g+s file1.txt
output:
-rwxrwSr-x 1 surendra surendra 0 Dec 27 11:24 file1.txt



so if you want executable permissions too, apply executable permissions to the file.

chmod g+x file1.txt
output:
-rwxrwsr-x 1 surendra surendra 0 Dec 5 11:24 file1.txt



you should see a smaller ‘s’ in the executable permission position.

How can I find all the SGID set files in Linux/Unix.

find / -perm +2000
The above find command will check all the files which is set with SGID bit(2000).

Can I set SGID for folders?

Yes, you can if it’s required (you should remember one thing, that Linux treats everything as a file)

How can I remove SGID bit on a file/folder?

chmod g-s file1.txt

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

What is a sticky Bit and how to set it in Linux?
Jan 1, 2012
What is a sticky Bit and how to set it in Linux?
This is next to SGID in our ongoing File and Folder permissions in Linux. We already discussed about CHMOD, UMASK, CHOWN, CHGRP SGID and SUID File and folder permissions etc in our previous posts. In this post we will see


 
What is Sticky Bit?

Why we require Sticky Bit?

Where we are going to implement Sticky Bit?

How to implement Sticky Bit in Linux?

What is Sticky Bit?
Sticky Bit is used mainly on folders in order to avoid deletion of a folder and its content by other user though he is having write permissions. If Sticky bit is enabled on a folder, the folder is deleted by only owner of the folder and super user(root). This is a security measure to suppress deletion of critical folders where it is having full permissions by others.

Learn Sticky Bit with examples:

Example: Create a project(A folder) where people will try to dump files for sharing, but they should not delete the files created by other users.

How can I setup Sticky Bit for a Folder?

Sticky Bit can be set in two ways

1) Symbolic way (t,represents sticky bit)

2) Numerical/octal way (1, Sticky Bit bit as value 1)
Use chmod command to set Sticky Bit on Folder: /opt/dump/

Symbolic way:

chmod o+t /opt/dump/
or 
chmod +t /opt/dump/
Let me explain above command we are setting Sticky Bit(+t) to folder /opt/dump by using chmod command.

Numerical way:

 
chmod 1757 /opt/dump/
Here in 1757, 1 indicates Sticky Bit set, 7 for full permissions for owner, 5 for read and execute permissions for group, and ful permissions for others.

Checking if a folder is set with Sticky Bit or not?

Use ls –l to check if the x in others permissions field is replaced by t or T

For example: /opt/dump/ listing before and after Sticky Bit set

Before Sticky Bit set:

ls -l

total 8

-rwxr-xrwx 1 xyz xyzgroup 148 Dec 22 03:46 /opt/dump/
After Sticky Bit set:

ls -l

total 8

-rwxr-xrwt 1 xyz xyzgroup 148 Dec 22 03:46 /opt/dump/
Some FAQ’s related to Sticky Bit:

Now sticky bit is set, lets check if user “temp” can delete this folder

$ rm -rf /opt/dump
 

rm: cannot remove `/opt/dump’: Operation not permitted

$ ls -l /opt

total 8

drwxrwxrwt 4 xyz xyzgroup 4096 2012-01-01 17:37 dump

$

if you observe he is unable to delete and even xyz user creted any files in dump folder, temp user can not delete it. But xyz user can crete and delte files in dump folder.

I am seeing “T” ie Capital s in the file permissions, what’s that?

After setting Sticky Bit to a file/folder if you see ‘T’ in the file permission area that indicates that the file/folder does not have executable permissions for others on that particular file/folder.

Sticky bit without Executable permissions:


so if you want executable permissions too, apply executable permissions to the file.

chmod o+x /opt/dump/
output: -rwxr-xrwt 1 xyz xyzgroup 0 Dec 5 11:24 /opt/dump/

Sticky bit with Executable permissions:


you should see a smaller ‘s’ in the executable permission position.

How can I find all the Sticky Bit set files in Linux/Unix.

find / -perm +1000
The above find command will check all the files which is set with Sticky Bit bit(1000).

Can I set Sticky Bit for files?

Yes, but most of the time its not required.

How can I remove Sticky Bit bit on a file/folder?

chmod o-t /opt/dump/