filename: Quora_Is-Linux-as-vulnerable-as-Windows_20170522.txt
https://www.quora.com/Is-Linux-as-vulnerable-as-Windows-If-its-safer-is-it-still-possible-to-create-a-WannaCry-for-Unix-systems

   Is Linux as vulnerable as Windows? If it's safer, is it still possible to create a WannaCry for Unix
   systems?

***
   I just want to figure out if the fame of being safer of Linux is because it really is or just because
   most of the hacker attacks Windows for being the most used OS. Also, what happen when a Company is
   attacked it’s most probable that the servers of that company are Linux.
   UpdateCancel

***
   I believe the main reason we see attacks are more common at Windows
   is the popularity of the platform.

   More people are spending time on vulnerability research and development of malicious code where most
   of the potential lies. Same thing goes in mobile for android. Yes, there are differences at security
   architecture and approach, but at the end the main reason for focus lies is the platform user base
   and popularity.

***
   Every system has vulnerabilities, the biggest being the user, but there are also issues with the
   Linux kernel itself or perhaps software that most users use (i.e. Systemd (the program that manages
   what programs start when)).

   Linux is inherinelty more secure than Windows because of the structure of Linux, and also because it
   is open source. Since anyone can look at the code, anyone can find security holes, some might exploit
   them but many will want to fix the issue (for game, or because they have something called a moral
   compass, whatever that is).

   But, that doesn't mean it's impossible for a virus like WannaCry be built for a Linux machine, it's
   just absurdly harder to do.

***
   There is the potential to do so, just not with this.

   The problem is getting the user to run it. The existing virus uses a vulnerability in Windows SMB
   handling. Most Linux systems don’t support it, though the protocol is available in the SAMBA project.
   The SAMBA code is not the same as Windows, it doesn’t work the same way, and is not vulnerable.

   The next problem is that the virus will be limited to just the files the user has write access to. No
   database files will be affected as they run as a different user. Some file management software could
   be affected as the files used are owned by the user affected.

   Some word viruses may work on linux… if the user is using Microsoft Office via something like Wine or
   Crossover. But that is because it is Microsoft Office that is vulnerable. Flash viruses may work… The
   “may” is because though the vulnerable application is Flash, because it is on Linux, some things
   don’t work quite the same way.

   There is some possiblity that javascript (or java even) viruses might get by…

   Email viruses/worms tend not to work - by default, no file is given execute permissions… thus trying
   to execute it fails. Doing so indirectly (by running a javascript/java interpreter to then interpret
   the file) is possible. Now it depends on whether the specific interpreter is vulnerable.

   For the most part, no Windows virus works on Linux. The protection architecture is different, the
   controls are different, the system calls and runtimes are different.

***
   Depends on the setup.
     * Removal of root

   Yes, you can remove the system administrator account. Everything will still work, if configured
   correctly. Doing this makes privilege escalation to the system administrator impossible, confining
   the attack. Hacks can't re-create the account.
     * Removal of Capabilities

   You can remove any specific set of features permanently. This makes exploiting them impossible. Hacks
   can't re-activate the features.
     * Control Groups

   You can designate groups of processes as having specific capabilities. This limits attack vectors.
     * Mandatory Access Controls, Multi-Level + Hierarchical : RBACS + GRSecurity + SELinux

   You can specify that any given user or file has specific rights. The usable rights are the subset
   common to the program, data, user running the program and user using the program.

   Multilevel means there's an additional dimension. Typically this is used by military operators, so
   that unclassified files cannot be opened in top secret software or vice versa.

   The idea is that a user can be operating in an unclassified mode, or any of the classified modes, and
   be locked to that mode of operation.
     * File Access Monitor and/or Tripwire

   Linux can detect any file alteration. This is an alternative to malware detection. File alteration
   detection detects if a file is altered, regardless of how. Virus signatures aren't needed.
     * Fully Logging File systems

   A fully logging filesystem tracks all versions of all files. Any version can be retrieved, as can the
   differences between versions.
     * Host Configuration Scanner

   This checks all mandatory and discretionary permissions to detect security violations.
     * Active Network Intrusion Detectors

   These scan network packets for known attack sequences. The ones that are any good lock down the
   firewall against attacks on detection.
     * Secure Malloc Replacement

   There are several. They prevent buffer overflows and underruns. Some use memory pools to prevent
   memory exhaustion attacks and predictive attacks on nearby buffers.
     * Trusted Security Modules

   These prevent all kinds of additional compartmentalization violations.
     * Root Jail

   A trivial mechanism that makes it very difficult to access files not required by a program from that
   program's space, no matter what.
     * xTables

   The IPTables + xTables system allows all kinds of packet munging to take place. It's entirely
   possible to intercept e-mail messages and redirect them through a malware detector. You could use
   this to validate that the grammar of messages was correct AND that it didn't include embedded
   executables.
     * Layered

   If Linux doesn't do everything but rather delegates work to an underlying kernel (there are such
   kernels and mutated base installs), attacking code has much less its can depend on. It can't be sure
   what is doing what.
     * Alternative libc

   There are many libc implementations that are API compatible but not ABI compatible. You can make your
   own by compiling glibc with non-standard options selected to break the ABI.

   This would make binaries compiled elsewhere break if installed. Nothing the attacker can do about it.

   I would seriously, seriously love to see anyone try to adapt WannaCry to a system so hardened. I do
   not believe it could be done. EAL5+B3-compliant systems with binary incompatibility and alternative
   implementations of core functions should be immune, though feel free to prove me wrong.

   Windows can do some of this, but not everything, and it's not as proven.

***
   First answer: NO, Linux is not as vulnerable as Windows and this will always be the case unless the
   unlikely happened and Microsoft makes Windows fully open source.

   Second answer: YES it is possible to make the equivalent of WannaCry for UNIX systems, especially
   closed source ones but even open ones like Linux. HOWEVER the architecture of UNIX style OSes makes
   it much mode difficult, and open source drastically limits the impact.

   It is NOT because Windows is the most popular OS because it isn't…there are actually more devices
   running OSes using the Linux kernel and it would actually be more impactful to target Linux than
   Windows since the rise of mobile and embedded computing. However Windows still rules the desktop and
   has a larger installed base in business and institutional environments where users are more likely to
   pay ransoms, plus hacking Windows is much easier and vulnerabilities remain unmatched for much
   longer. So despite less devices being windows powered criminals can make more money doing less work
   by targeting Windows.

   Further explanation :

   WannaCry and it's variants became widespread solely because the source code for Windows is closed
   from the public. The NSA used it's capabilities and possibly special access to Windows code to build
   up a secret “bag of tricks”.. .exploits of bugs that they deliberately kept secret from Microsoft so
   they could use them to hack into enemy systems before Microsoft could discover and fix them.
   Unfortunately the NSA was somehow compromised and those secret hacks fell into the hands of criminals
   and Microsoft had to scramble to deploy patches to vulnerable systems.

   Such a scenario is virtually impossible to replicate in the Linux kernel or SAMBA...the SMB
   implementation used by pretty much all UNIX like OSes...because the source code to this software is
   open to the public. The NSA would not be able to keep their exploits secret long enough to make much
   use of them, and thousands of maybe even millions of coders have the ability to fix any issues that
   are discovered. Historically newly discovered zero day flaws are fixed FAR more rapidly in open
   source projects than in closed source. As such exploits that target typical widespread open source
   systems are not as valuable.
