filename: quora_does-assembly-program-need-os_20190423.txt
https://www.quora.com/If-an-assembly-program-needs-an-OS-and-kernel-to-run-then-how-does-the-kernel-run

If an assembly program needs an OS and kernel to run, then how does the kernel run?

Who says you need an OS and a kernel to run a program?

When a CPU first starts up and comes out of reset, it usually jumps to a fixed address and starts executing code.
(The exact address varies by processor family and sometimes the system configuration.)

Typically, those first few instructions were written in assembly language, and linked to run at that reset
address. That code resides in some non-volatile memory (e.g. ROM or flash). Once the machine’s going, it might
branch to code written in a higher level language.

This is the very first code the CPU runs, right after reset, before any OS or kernel or anything else gets
loaded.

Remember: CPUs just execute instructions, and assembly language is just one way of describing a set of
instructions for the CPU to run.

Constructs such as OSes and kernels are human constructs—abstractions built by humans to make it easier to
structure software. The OS kernel and runtime environment provide services and device drivers and filesystems
and all sorts of nice things to make it easier to develop software. And, since many folks use those same
abstractions, your software is more likely to work well with other software on that same system. At the very
least, it’s more likely to agree on what constitutes a file, or how to get input from a keyboard.

You can write programs without OSes or kernels or anything like that. It’s called bare metal programming. I’ve
written a fair bit of bare metal software in my day. In a bare metal environment, you’re building everything
yourself.

You want to read from a keyboard in a bare metal environment? Well, you’re going to have to know an awful lot
about how that keyboard is interfaced to the CPU. It could be relatively simple if it’s an old-school
matrix-scanned keyboard hooked to two I/O ports, or rather complicated if it’s connected via USB through a
USB controller. Remember, we’re bare metal with no OS support, no kernels, nothing—so you have to develop all
your own drivers for everything.

So back to “how does the kernel run?”

When you reset the CPU, it starts executing code at the reset address. That code initializes some of the
hardware, and eventually branches to a boot loader. I say “eventually,” as that path can be fairly short and
straightforward, as in many embedded systems, or long, complicated and torturous, as in modern PCs.

The code that runs up to this point includes just enough driver support to be able to load the OS off of
whatever media it’s on and start it up. At the fairly minimal end, you might have something like the
Apple Disk ][ ROM (512 bytes) loading a boot sector from a floppy (256 bytes). In a modern PC, you have a
fairly complex BIOS with effectively a mini-OS of its own doing the work of getting to a bootloader.

All of that code up through the bootloader is bare metal code. It runs without an OS or kernel. But it gets
enough software into the system so that it can load the OS kernel and go from there.

And some of that bare metal software may be written in assembly.


---
