filename: quora_good-coding-sugesstions_20181022.txt
https://www.quora.com/As-a-programmer-what-coding-tricks-do-you-know-of-for-regular-people-to-incorporate-into-their-coding

As a programmer, what coding tricks do you know of for regular people to incorporate into their coding?

1.  Make use of inbuilt features, like map, reduce, and filter when dealing with arrays. I see so many new
    programmers dealing with bugs of leaky scopes, or overly complex nested if statements in nested iterations.

    This goes further, use namespaces and package/library/module features in the language to encapsulate
    well-tested code. Don’t just plop everything into the same package or scope.

2.  Practice code golf. Try to be succinct and write only the minimum. KISS, Keep it Simple Stupid,
    never make a function that you can’t keep entirely in your head.

3.  Solve for the common case, and stop wasting time on generic functions. It’s better to have 5 simple
    functions for 5 cases, than to try to make one generic function. Try to balance #2 and #3 as they are
    at odds sometimes.

4.  Use TDD sparingly. You don’t have to test everything, but you should test anything that you can’t
    work out and imagine in your head. The most important tests are DDT , Default Driven Tests, that is,
    tests where you try to break your own code.

5.  Create admin interfaces for any complex feature, this will allow admins/moderators/power users to fix
    problems, restore deleted records, or undo changes. Always create a feature with an idea in mind of the
    most common ways to mess it all up. Always think of a way to undo whatever it is that your feature will do.

6.  Logging is for production, tracing is for development. Your life will be a lot easier if you have
    logs to sift through when you start getting obscure or poorly reported bugs from users. “It doesn’t
    work like I expected.” Is not really a bug report.

7.  Isolate and or eliminate dependencies. Frameworks and dependencies are for Proofs of Concept,
    you’re supposed to be replacing that code in production. Don’t be like all those NodeJS apps that
    crashed because someone unpublished their str_pad function.

8.  Stop being a language/paradigm fanatic. Use the best tool, best methodology, for the job.

9.  Read other peoples code, and try to understand how/why they did it that way. But go deeper. Why did
    they make that choice, were they bored? Where they rushed? Try to be a little empathetic to the code of
    others as well.

10. Read a programming book now and again, and I’m not talking “Sam’s Teach yourself C++ is 24
    hours.” Read something by Martin Fowler, Bob Martin, Kevlin Henney. Read SICP, or the Little Schemer. Maybe
    some of the early PragProg stuff. Just read anything you can to get exposure to other ideas and perspectives.
