filename: quora_AI_detect-understand_20190318.txt
https://www.quora.com/AI-can-detect-a-cat-in-a-picture-but-can-AI-truly-understand-what-a-cat-is-or-what-a-cat-does-beyond-a-series-of-pixels-that-statistical-probabilities-indicate-is-most-likely-a-cat

AI can detect a cat in a picture, but can AI truly understand what a cat is or what a cat does beyond a series
of pixels that statistical probabilities indicate is most likely a cat?

Nope. The AI has no idea what a cat is.

That’s one of the fundamental limitations of algorithmic AI, and it illustrates why people are getting ahead
of themselves worrying about self-aware AI.

Algorithmic AI does not know what a cat is, other than — as you pointed out — pixels arranged in a pattern that
is recognizable as an image of a cat. It’s not conscious. It is not aware of the real world or animals like cats
within it. The only thing it “knows” is the data it processes.

The way it learns how to tell the difference between a cat and another object is by its operators feeding it
millions of images of cats — cats of all shapes, sizes, colors and positions — the same way it learns how to
process human faces. The more data it’s given, the better it becomes at its highly specific task.




(A GAN image rendered by ThisPersonDoesNotExist.com, illustrating the difficulty the software often has in
rendering human ears. A human artist would realize the ear doesn’t look right, but to the GAN it’s not an ear, it’s visual data.)

This kind of algorithmic AI is obviously useful for applications like facial recognition at airports, for
example. If a person on a terrorism watch list tries to board a plane, it’s helpful to have an additional layer
of security in addition to human eyes keeping a lookout.

But again, that AI doesn’t know what human faces actually are, it simply recognizes patterns in image data and
matches them with an existing database of wanted suspects.

Building an AI that understands what a cat really is, is an entirely different ballgame. It’s a more difficult
task by unknown orders of magnitude.

One interesting way to look at this is to go to This Person Does Not Exist, which uses generative adversarial
networks to create startlingly realistic portraits of people who literally do not exist. The software is
remarkable in its ability to create human faces.

But if you look closely — and refresh the page to see more faces — you’ll see those portraits often include
weird visual artifacts around the ears. The AI also has difficulties properly rendering human hair, teeth,
open mouths and sometimes eyes as well.

A human artist, who knows what ears, eyes and teeth are, would immediately look at that and know something isn’t
right. But an algorithmic AI doesn’t know what those things are or what they’re for, so it doesn’t see anything
wrong with rendering an ear as a weird swirl. To the AI, it’s just data.
