filename: quora_best-language-to-learn-for-a-beginner-Java-or-Python_20190227.txt
https://www.quora.com/Whats-the-best-language-to-learn-for-a-beginner-Java-or-Python


What's the best language to learn for a beginner? Java or Python?

When you are learning any new skill, there is one key that is too often missed. Those who get it right
are far more likely to be motivated enough to practice and learn the skill.

Have you ever played a video game?

It can be any video game, but modern games are especially good at this. It’s not a tutorial, well not
exactly JUST a tutorial.

Go pick up and play a modern video game and at the beginning there will be some kind of simple tutorial
about what the buttons do. Press A to jump, use the joystick to move around, that sort of thing. Simple
stuff. Obvious right?

Well, what happens next is key.

On the first level of the game it is easy to take what you just learned and get positive feedback right
away. You just learned how to swing your hammer? Great, now you get to smash an enemy to bits. It’s
so easy a child could do it! (And they do…)

And when you smash the enemy, you get a reward right away!

Some games give you coins, experience points, explosions, cool sounds, victory music, or all many of
other feedback that makes you feel good. Good enough to do it again.

Positive feedback loops are the key. This goes all the way back to B.F. Skinner training dogs to salivate
at the sound of a bell. When we get rewarded, we do more things that get us the reward.

When you want to learn something, it needs to have a quick and positive feedback loop or you will lose
interest right away.

So, back to the question of Java vs. Python for beginners.

Python is the better choice because it has a faster positive feedback loop. The code doesn’t need to
be compiled. It doesn’t need to be written in a fancy IDE. There is no project structures or anything
like that you need to worry about.

With python, you could just run the python command line program and type print(“hello world”) into
the program and hit enter to run it. You’ve now written your first line of python code.

From there you can start writing code into a single python script file and run that instead to add more
interesting complexity.

Java requires more setup and hand holding to get to even print out “hello world”. Compilers and all
of that make programming cycle feedback slower.

Again, beginners need fast feedback and early wins. That builds interest and momentum. It makes everything
feel better and gives you the feeling that you can already start creating with your new skills.

So, for beginners, Python is the way to go.


---
