https://www.quora.com/Why-did-humans-and-most-animals-develop-4-limbs-Is-it-just-random-Could-it-have-been-possible-that-instead-of-4-we-developed-8-limbs

Why did humans and most animals develop 4 limbs? Is it just random? Could it have been possible that instead
of 4, we developed 8 limbs?

Adam Wu, Evolutionary neurosurgeon

Most animals actually have 6 limbs. The second most common limb number among animals is probably zero. Animals
like humans with 4 limbs constitute only a small subset of all animals. Namely the terrestrial vertebrates and
their close relatives.

They do tend to be the largest and most noticeable of land animals. Though this is in part because humans are
one of them and are biased towards noticing things within our own size range rather than much smaller.

Terrestrial vertebrates descend from a single ancestor that had four fleshy fins, and inherited that pattern.

Why did that ancestor have 4 limbs? That’s partly chance but not entirely.

First, vertebrates are bilaterians and have bilateral symmetry. This automatically means that limb numbers must
be even. You will not see a land vertebrate with 3 or 5 limbs.

Second, the base vertebrate body plan has no limbs (in contrast to say the arthropods). Vertebrates evolved
limbs as a sort of ad hoc addition to their base body plan later. As a result of this, vertebrate embryology
is actually somewhat resistant to adding too many limbs. Unlike arthropods, whose base body plan includes limbs
and whose embryology can add limbs very easily (unsurprisingly there are lots of arthropods that have lots of
limbs), adding too many limbs usually completely messes up a vertebrate’s embryological sequence and results
in a nonviable organism. This basically limits vertebrates to just a handful of limbs, probably less than 8.

Third, 4 limbs is the minimum number that you can have and still possess inertial stability, meaning you can
stay up on your limbs without continuously adjusting your balance. 2 limbs on the other hand is dynamically
unstable, and requires continuous neuromuscular adjustment to work. Bipedal terrestrial organisms thus need
more sophisticated brains and motor and balance control systems than quadrupeds or hexapods. This makes it
harder for a two limbed sea creature to evolve to live on land than a four limbed sea creature - there are
more evolutionary steps required to get useful mobility on land. Unsurprisingly bipedal animals evolved later,
after animals had already become very competent on land and had already evolved sophisticated motor control and
balance systems.

Thus, for vertebrates 2 limbs is easier to evolve than 4, and 4 easier to evolve than 6, and anything over eight
hard enough to evolve as to be very unlikely, but early 4 limb vertebrates would have had a huge advantage in
evolving to live on land than early 2 limb vertebrates.

So while the 4 limb pattern ultimately arose by chance, 4 was probably the most likely number to evolve,
at least in land vertebrates.
