filename: reset-ubuntu-password-grub_20141210.txt
http://www.howtogeek.com/howto/linux/reset-your-forgotten-ubuntu-password-in-2-minutes-or-less/

Reset Your Forgotten Ubuntu Password in 2 Minutes or Less

   If you've ever forgotten your password, you aren't alone... it's probably one of the most common tech
   support problems I've encountered over the years. Luckily if you are using Ubuntu they made it
   incredibly easy to reset your password.

   image

   All it takes is adjusting the boot parameters slightly and typing a command or two, but we'll walk
   you through it.

   Reset Your Ubuntu Password

   Reboot your computer, and then as soon as you see the GRUB Loading screen, make sure to hit the ESC
   key so that you can get to the menu.

   image

   Root Shell - Easy Method

   If you have the option, you can choose the "recovery mode" item on the menu, usually found right
   below your default kernel option.

   image[3]

   Then choose "Drop to root shell prompt" from this menu.

   image[6]

   This should give you a root shell prompt.

   Alternate Root Shell Method

   If you don't have the recovery mode option, this is the alternate way to manually edit the grub
   options to allow for a root shell.

   First you'll want to make sure to choose the regular boot kernel that you use (typically just the
   default one), and then use the "e" key to choose to edit that boot option.

   image

   Now just hit the down arrow key over to the "kernel" option, and then use the "e" key to switch to
   edit mode for the kernel option.

   image

   You'll first be presented with a screen that looks very similar to this one:

   image

   You'll want to remove the "ro quiet splash" part with the backspace key, and then add this onto the
   end:

     rw init=/bin/bash

   image

   Once you hit enter after adjusting the kernel line, you'll need to use the B key to choose to boot
   with that option.

   image

   At this point the system should boot up very quickly to a command prompt.

   Changing the Actual Password

   You can use the following command to reset your password:

     passwd <username>

   For example my username being geek I used this command:

     passwd geek

   image

   After changing your password, use the following commands to reboot your system. (The sync command
   makes sure to write out data to the disk before rebooting)

     sync
     reboot -f

   I found that the -f parameter was necessary to get the reboot command to work for some reason. You
   could always hardware reset instead, but make sure to use the sync command first.

   And now you should be able to login without any issues.
