filename: resume-large-scp-file-transfer_20151207.txt
http://ask.xmodulo.com/resume-large-scp-file-transfer-linux.html

How to resume a large SCP file transfer on Linux
Posted on December 4, 2015 by Dan Nanni
Question: I was downloading a large file using SCP, but the download transfer failed in the middle because my
laptop got disconnected from the network. Is there a way to resume the interrupted SCP transfer where I left
off, instead of downloading the file all over again?

Originally based on BSD RCP protocol, SCP (Secure copy) is a mechanism that allows you to transfer a file
between two end points over a secure SSH connection. However, as a simple secure copy protocol, SCP does not
understand range-request or partial transfer like HTTP does. As such, popular SCP implementations like the scp
command line tool cannot resume aborted downloads from lost network connections.

If you want to resume an interrupted SCP transfer, you need to rely on other programs which support range
requests. One popular such program is rsync. Similar to scp, rsync can also transfer files over SSH.

Suppose you were trying to download a file (bigdata.tgz) from a remote host remotehost.com using scp, but the
SCP transfer was stopped in the middle due to a stalled SSH connection. You can use the following rsync
command to easily resume the stopped transfer. Note that the remote server must have rsync installed as well.
$ cd /path/to/directory/of/partially_downloaded_file
$ rsync -P -rsh=ssh userid@remotehost.com:bigdata.tgz ./bigdata.tgz

The "-P" option is the same as "--partial --progress", allowing rsync to work with partially downloaded files.
The "-rsh=ssh" option tells rsync to use ssh as a remote shell.

Once the command is invoked, rsync processes on local and remote hosts compare a local file (./bigdata.tgz)
and a remote file (userid@remotehost.com:bigdata.tgz), determine among themselves what portion of the file is
not the same, and transfer the discrepancy to either end. In this case, missing bytes in the partially
downloaded local file is downloaded from a remote host.

If the above rsync session itself gets interrupted, you can resume it as many time as you want by typing the
same command. rsync will automatically restart the transfer where it left off.
