filename: ripping-dvds_20130809.txt
RIPPING DVDs ON LINUX

---
https://help.ubuntu.com/community/RestrictedFormats/RippingDVDs

RestrictedFormats/RippingDVDs
Vsebina

Thoggen (universe)
AcidRip (multiverse)
k9copy (universe)
dvd::rip (multiverse)
ogmrip (multiverse)
HandBrake (third party)
RipIt4Me under Wine
Fair Use Wizard under Wine
Troubleshooting
Ubuntu contains a number of DVD backup applications (aka "DVD rippers"). To rip
encrypted DVDs, you must install libdvdcss2 the same as you would to play encrypted
DVDs (see Playing DVDs).

Libdvdcss2 may not be enough for playing DVDs produced by Warner Bros (they have a
JACKET_P folder as well as a txtdt file). It would require libudf to be installed
on the system.

There are several different utilities targeted at ripping DVDs:

Thoggen (universe)
Rips DVDs and encodes them into Ogg files with Theora video and Vorbis audio.

AcidRip (multiverse)
Rips DVDs and encodes them.

k9copy (universe)
k9copy is a Qt based app that will make an exact copy of a DVD as an ISO file or as
the normal DVD folder structure on the destination drive. It can also shrink and/or
encode your DVDs to different formats such as AVI/MPEG-4, MPEG-2, Flash Video (FLV),
Real Video and QuickTime.

dvd::rip (multiverse)
A DVD ripper that can also encode the ripped DVD to VCD/SVCD or AVI/MPEG-4 and
split the file into 700MB chunks on the destination drive.

ogmrip (multiverse)
An application for ripping and encoding DVD into AVI, OGM, MP4 or Matroska files
using lots of audio and video formats (Vorbis, MP3, PCM, AC3, DTS, AAC, MPEG-4 ASP,
MPEG-4 AVC, Theora). OGMRrip calculates cropping parameters and scaling factors
and supports multiple audio and subtitles streams encoding.

HandBrake (third party)
HandBrake is a DVD to MPEG-4 converter. An i386 and amd64 binary is provided on the
HandBrake website for Linux users. HandBrake for Linux supports encoding in MPEG-4,
including H.264.

RipIt4Me under Wine
If you install Wine then you can try installing RipIt4Me which uses both DVD Shrink
and DVD Decrypter as backends (these can be downloaded from the RipIt4Me site as
specific versions are needed). This supposedly bypasses the current copy protection
mechanisms such as RipGuard and ARccOS. Installation works fine under Dapper LTS &
Feisty using this guide. As no Linux applications (dvdrip/k9copy) can bypass newer
copy protection methods just yet, this is probably the only real option at the moment.

The main ripit4me site has been taken down, and the guide linked to has been
removed from the forum, but below is a guide that works. The software can be found
by Googling.

Note: The link provided above, www.ripit4me.org, does not take you to the ripit4me
site. For more information about ripit4me, take a look at the afterdawn.com forums,
in particular this thread.

Install Wine from the official site. There are DEBs for Dapper, Edgy & Feisty. If you
use 64-bit, then --force-architecture the installation with dpkg as this works fine.

Install DVD Shrink 3.2.0.15, DVD Decryptor 3.5.4.0 and finally RipIt4Me 1.7.0. You
will also need to copy mfc42.dll and msvcp60.dll from a WindowsXP disc into the
~/.wine/drive_c/windows/system32/ directory.

Start RipIt4Me with:

wine RipIt4Me

and use the Wizard Mode button to initiate a disc copy. Choose a target directory
and whether you want movie only or full DVD etc, then click next Click the Create
PSL file button in the next dialogue then after that, Rip DVD.

This loads DVD Decryptor and tries to autoload the PSL file but it fails as the
file is saved in the DVD Decryptor program folder, but Ripit4Me thinks it is in
its default directory. Just OK to the error dialogues, then navigate to the DVD
Decryptor folder and choose the PSL file from there.

IMPORTANT:

If you only ever used Linux on your PC, the region code will not be set. You can
play DVDs in Totem etc without setting region codes. At this stage of the ripping
process however, it *will* set a region code of the disc being copied, despite
giving an option not to. Use with caution if you intend to rip many different region
discs. Use regionset afterwards if you need to set a new region on the drive.

Click on the Decrypt button in DVD Decryptor and wait a while. If you have 32bit
IO and DMA enabled this should go very fast, otherwise it may take 25 mins or so.

After this is complete, RipIt4Me will pop up a new dialogue where you can remove
various protection techniques, such as tiny cells etc. This is Step 3. In Step 4
of the wizard, you can clean up the VOBs and remove references to unreferenced
video. On older discs, such as Fightclub, Gladiator and Titan AE (all tested
successfully), you can skip step 3 entirely, and deselect 'remove unreferenced
video' in step 4 before cleaning the VOBs. This is because older discs do not have
copy protection apart from CSS. On newer discs, such as Casino Royale (ripped very
successfully despite being a Sony disc, with newest copy protection mechanisms),
that contain many types of copy protection, you should select all options in step 3
of the wizard and all options in step 4 when cleaning the VOBs. These settings are
very disc specific and require a bit of tweaking for each film if you run into issues.

After cleaning VOBs, open the movie in DVD Shrink using the button in wizard step 4,
then choose the audio tracks and subtitles you wish to keep, then select backup. Auto
settings will compress a dual layer disc to fit on one layer. If you do not want
this, choose No Compression. Backup takes about 8 minutes on a Core2Duo 7200 on
average at this stage.

I recommend ripping discs without menus and just the audio/sub tracks you need and
burning it as an ISO in DVD Shrink, because if you plan on ripping to a hard disc
archive, then single file ISOs are easier to browse and can be burnt at a later
date if necessary. Also, Totem and VLC can play ISO files directly without mounting
them first. Menus, I choose to remove because they can still cause some issues:
In Gladiator, the menu was soundless and corrupted until I pressed the Menu button
on the remote, then it appeared correctly. Also, if you remove some audio tracks/
all subs etc then the menu becomes slightly useless...better to select audio/subs
from the DVD player remote.

As for hard disc archives and streaming media from PC to TV, I do not know if ISO
is most suitable method.

I have found RipIt4Me to be the most successful method, and it has not yet failed to
rip a disc, but I have not tried the Feisty repository versions of dvdrip or k9copy,
and these may or may not contain workarounds for RipGuard/ARccOS.

Fair Use Wizard under Wine
One ripping possibility is Fair Use Wizard 2 under Wine. It is not the fastest
ripper but it can handle even some of these new protection schemes. Light edition
is free and gives good basic encoding options. Just download and install software
under wine and make sure that wine can find your DVD drive.

Troubleshooting
Note that with some recent DVD films, *all* current Linux DVD rippers have problems
reading the disc due to newer copy protection schemes such as ARccOS or RipGuard. The
same is true even of the latest version of DVDshrink on Windows, and only certain
tools like DVD2HDD, DVD Decrypter, and AnyDVD (Windows programs) can handle the
newer copy protection mechanisms.

RestrictedFormats/RippingDVDs (nazadnje spreminjano 2011-01-05 06:31:09, spreminjal
developer-loke)

---
http://www.prtc.net/~laforey/ripit4melinux.html

Installing RipIt4Me in Ubuntu Linux

Procedure to install and run Ripit4me in Linux under WINE. Ubuntu-Linux is used.
Download or get the following software and files ready:
WINE
Ripit4me
SetupDVDDecrypter_3.5.4.0.exe
dvdshrink32setup.exe
mfc42.dll   (http://www.dll-files.com/dllindex/dll-files.shtml?mfc42)
msvcp60.dll (http://www.dll-files.com/dllindex/dll-files.shtml?msvcp60)

1-Install Wine. Use Synaptic or "apt-get install".
2-Insert a dvd disc "movie" in your drive. Make sure it mounts.
3-In a terminal type : winecfg
4-Under Applications select "Default Settings" and "Windows NT 4.0" in Windows
Version.
5-Select the "Drives" tab.
6-Press the "Autodetect" button. WINE will detect your drives. Press apply and OK
to close "winecfg".

WINE creates a directory named ".wine" in your /home/user folder. To see it select
"Show Hidden Files" from the "View" menu in the file browser. Inside is your
"drive_c" folder.

7-Copy the "mfc42.dll" and "msvcp60.dll" files to the:
".wine/drive_c/windows/system32" directory.
8-Install DVDDecrypter by opening "SetupDVDDecrypter_3.5.4.0.exe" with WINE. Follow
the installer procedure.
9- Install DvdShrink by opening "dvdshrink32setup.exe" with WINE. Follow the
installer.
10- Create a folder named "RipIt4Me" in:
/home/user/.wine/drive_c/Program_Files/. Decompress "RipIt4Me.zip" into this
"RipIt4Me" folder. Just copy "RipIt4Me.exe" into the folder.
11-Follow this to make RipIt4Me work under WINE:
Open a "Terminal" then copy and paste this code into it:

cd ~/.wine/drive_c/windows/temp && mkdir TempIFOs && echo "Welcome to RipIt4Me"
> TempIFOs/RipIt4Me

12-Open a Terminal, enter: winecfg
If the programs do not appear in the Applications tab, use the "Add application"
button, and select "Windows NT 4.0" in "Windows Version".


With the DVD disc still in the drive, open each of the programs and set the settings
or options.


You can open each program using the WINE menu under "Applications" or make some
cool menu links to open them. Follow this example.
For DvdShrink enter this in a terminal:

sudo gedit /usr/share/applications/dvdshrink.desktop

Copy this text in the document:

[Desktop Entry]
Name=DVD Shrink
Exec=wine .wine/drive_c/Program\ Files/DVD\ Shrink/DVD\ Shrink\ 3.2.exe
Icon=gnome-dev-dvd.png
Type=Application
Categories=Application;AudioVideo

Save the file.

A link is created under: Applications- Sound & Video. It should open the program.
Test it.


Thanks to:

"Miss. Marple", "mrbass.org", "bjgood" for their tutorials, and the Programmers
for creating such amazing software.

---
http://www.fiz-ix.com/2012/12/ripping-and-burning-dvds-in-ubuntu-with-k9copy-and-brasero/

Ripping and Burning DVDs in Ubuntu with K9Copy and Brasero
Posted December 4th, 2012. Filed under Guides Ubuntu
After a fresh install of Ubuntu and media software and codecs, a little more work
is required to start ripping and burning DVDs. Below is a guide to get you started
using Brasero (the CD/DVD burning application included with Ubuntu) and an application
called K9Copy, which is similar to the once popular program DVD Shrink for Windows.
Step 1: Install K9Copy and Its Dependencies
To install K9Copy open a terminal and use Ubuntu’s package management program apt-get.
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install k9copy
K9Copy requires the packages libdvdcss and libdvdcss2 to circumvent DVD copy
protections. These packages may automatically install when apt-get determines
the dependencies of K9Copy but only if the Medibuntu repository has been added to
your system’s source list as per “Step 1” of this post. If these packages were not
installed, add Medibuntu to your source list and then install the packages with
the following command. (If they are already installed the following command will
not harm anything so you might as well execute it if you are not sure.)
sudo apt-get install libdvdcss libdvdcss2
Step 2: Rip a DVD Using K9Copy
To start K9Copy type k9copy at the command prompt or use the Desktop GUI to navigate
to Applications > Sound & Video > K9Copy. The program is pretty easy to figure out
if you have used DVD Shrink or a similar application in the past. The defaults are
pretty good. One thing I did was to navigate to Settings > Configure K9Copy… and
change the DVD size to 4464 MB in the “DVD Backup” pane. This is because I want to
burn copies to one-layer DVD-Rs. This size is slightly smaller than what a typical
one-layer blank DVD can hold, but it is the same as the target size specified
by DVD Shrink. To rip a DVD, place the disc in your drive and click the “Open”
button in the K9Copy menu bar. Unless you want to do more complicated remastering
of the disc’s contents, select the check box next to the disc’s root in the tree
view window and click the “Copy” button in the menu bar. A dialog box will appear
asking for a save name and location for the ISO (.iso file) that will be created.
Step 3: Burning the ISO to a Blank DVD
To burn the ISO you just created to a disc, place a blank DVD in your drive and open
Brasero by typing brasero at the command prompt or by navigating to Applications >
Sound & Video > Brasero Disk Burning. When the project window opens, select “Burn
Image.” If you have burned DVD images before the rest should be straightforward. Click
“Properties” to change the burn speed, select the disk image (.iso file) from the
drop down box, and click “Burn.” Enjoy ripping and burning DVDs with Ubuntu, K9Copy,
and Brasero, and remember to not make illegal copies.

---
