filename: sorting-algorithm_which-is-best_20190613.txt
https://www.quora.com/Which-sorting-algorithm-is-best-and-why/answer/Siwei-Wang-4

Which sorting algorithm is best and why?

   There is no ideal sorting algorithm for every single case. The best algorithm to use varies from case
   to case. Consider the 3 most common O(n log n) comparison sorts.

   Merge Sort
   Split your array in half. Recursively merge sort the left and right sub-arrays. Then, merge them
   together (linear time) to get the full sorted array.

   Pros:
     * Has O(n log n) worst-case run time.
     * Of the 3 algorithms here, it is the only one that is stable, so if you want to retain the
       ordering of comparatively equivalent items, this should be your go-to.
     * Easy to implement on linked list data structures. Does not require random access.

   Cons:
     * Has O(n) space complexity, which is worse than the other 2 sorts.
     * Slower than the other 2 algorithms in practice. Why? You have to write all your data into another
       array and back into your original one. Copying is usually slower than comparing.

   Heap Sort
   Generate a heap data structure on the array. Then, pop the top of the heap and move it to the end of
   the array. Repeat until the heap is empty and the entire array is sorted.

   Pros:
     * Has O(n log n) worst-case run time.
     * Can sort in-place so uses O(1) additional space.

   Cons:
     * Unstable!
     * Still much slower than Quick Sort on average. You still need to perform a swap on every element
       in the array, even if it's already in the right place.

   Quick Sort
   Pick a pivot from the array and partition the array into sub-arrays. Everything in the left sub-array
   is less than the pivot. Everything in the right sub-array is greater than the pivot. Recursively sort
   the left and right sub-arrays.

   Pros:
     * Generally the fastest sorting algorithm in practice. It only swaps what needs to be swapped.
       Swaps are slow!
     * Can be performed in-place, but in practice, the stack frames from recursive function calls
       results in O(log n) space complexity.

   Cons:
     * Has O(n^2) in the worst case. Ideally, the chosen pivot is the median. The further
       away it is from the median, the worse the performance.
     * Like Heap Sort, it's unstable!

   Which one's the best?
   As you can see, each of the sorting algorithms have their pros and cons. Choose the sort that is best
   suited for your data. If you're constrained in space, go for heap sort. If you need something stable,
   merge sort is your friend. For nearly sorted data, consider that insertion sort is O(n)
   time!

   Modern sorting algorithms use hybrid sorts that combine the best qualities of the different basic
   sorting algorithms. Perhaps the most widely used (and arguably the "best") is introsort (std::sort in
   C++) which runs quick sort and switches to heap sort when the recursion gets too deep. This way, you
   get the fast performance of quick sort in practice while guaranteeing a worst case O(n log
   n) run time.


---
