filename: ssl_3-easy-steps-to-a-security-certificate_20151016.txt
http://www.linuxveda.com/2015/10/08/3-easy-steps-to-a-security-certificate/

3 easy steps to a security certificate
A quick tutorial demonstrating how to use openssl to create a security certificate for the web

By Nneko Branche -Oct 8, 2015

As a systems administrator, building and deploying secure systems is one of my top priorities; after
all it is a part of the job description.

However, surprisingly and despite the constant stream of vulnerabilities, plus the need for a heightened
security posture, we still often see many web services out in the wild without the protection of HTTPS.

What intrigued me even further was that many a developer or newbie system administrator when queried
indicated that the reason they didn’t deploy a web site or services with HTTPS was simply because they
were not aware of the process to generate a certificate or hadn’t done the research because they felt
it would be a hassle.

In today’s world security entails not just battening down the hatches on the server but also ensuring
that we encrypt messages being passed in and out by the services running under those hatches. When it
comes to the web the first step is to use HTTPS and for that you will need a security certificate.

Therefore, let us dispel this myth and contribute to closing this gap. In the following tutorial I will
show you how to get HTTPS up and running by following 3 simple steps.

Creating a private key with openssl
The first thing to do is to log into the server and generate a private key.
	openssl genpkey -algorithm RSA -out private.key -pkeyopt rsa_keygen_bits:2048
	
This key will be used to sign an encrypted request file which will be sent to the external certificate
authority who are responsible for validating that your site is who it says and originates from the domain
designated in a valid certificate.

Generating the CSR
A CSR (Certificate Signing Request) is small text file that is submitted to the CA (Certificate
Authority). The file is encrypted and has a similar function to that of a public encryption key. The
exception here is that this will only be used to digitally sign the cert file in combination with the
CA’s keys on the final certificate that will be used during in the HTTPS communication.
	openssl req -new -key {private key file} -out {output file}
	
Getting the certificate
Having the CSR is only half of the process. To complete it and get the cert the CSR file has to be
submitted to the authority that is recognized to issue public certificates. There are many such CAs out
there and a simple search engine query will pop up over a dozen. Many CAs will generate a cert for you
once you provide them with the CSR for a small charge but there are also providers that will do it for
free as well. However, if this cert is only needed for a non public facing site on the intranet then a
self signed certificate will suffice. To create a self-signed cert do the following.
	openssl x509 -req -days 365 -in {csr file} -signkey {key file} -out {cert file}
	
Enabling the certificate on the web server
Once the certificate is in hand it needs to be added to the web server configuration before your users
will be able to access the site or service using https. In most instances this is as simple as editing
the configuration file by adding a few additional directives and then rebooting the server. For example
on apache the following directives will suffice.
	SSLEngine on
	SSLCertificateFile {certificate file}
	SSLCertificateKeyFile {key file}
	SetEnvIf User-Agent ".*MSIE.*" nokeepalive ssl-unclean-shutdown
	
A more in depth tutorial on installing certificates on httpd is at Big Thinking Applied: Adding Certificates
to Apache. For an additional explanation of the CSR generation process read the original piece at Big
Thinking Applied.
