filename: swap-partitions-on-linux_20140627.txt
http://www.maketecheasier.com/swap-partitions-on-linux/

What You Need to Know About Swap Partitions on Linux

What is swap?

   When a multitasking operating system runs out of physical memory, it is unable to start new processes
   or allocate more memory to existing processes. To solve this problem, a special block of space on the
   local storage (often the hard drive) is set aside to act as a temporary holding area for processes
   that aren't currently running. The OS "swaps" the inactive process out of memory and on to the hard
   disk. This frees up memory for new work. When the inactive process becomes active again, it will be
   swapped back from the local storage to the memory. This procedure is known as swapping.

Is swap space really necessary?

   Is swap space technically necessary? No. Linux can work without it and in some situations, like
   embedded solutions, Linux can be run without swap. If the OS gets into a situation where it doesn't
   have enough memory, it will panic and stop. If there is enough physical RAM, the machine will run
   without any problems.

   Is swap space practically necessary? Yes. Although swapping slows down a computer (as reading and
   writing to a hard disk is much slower than accessing RAM) and having as much physical memory on board
   is the best solution to avoid swapping, there are legitimate situations where swapping is desirable.
   For example, during system boot, there can be processes that run (and so consume system memory) but
   then effectively sleep for very long periods of time. Or memory that is allocated, written to and
   then never used again. In these situations, the swapping algorithm will start to migrate this memory
   to the hard disk and so free up valuable system memory. This actually ensures that the maximum amount
   of RAM is available at all times and so increases performance.

   swap-partition-in-gparted swap-partition-in-gparted

   On machines that don't have enough physical RAM for everything to reside in memory then the use of
   swap space is essential!

   For completeness, it is worth mentioning that Linux also has a subsystem called the Out-Of-Memory
   Killer (OOM), which rather than stopping the kernel when it runs out of memory, will start to kill of
   processes to free resources. Its actions are configurable.

How much swap space should I allocate?

   There is no absolute rule and since hard disk space is cheap (dollar per Gigabyte) it is better to
   allocate too much than too little space. As a rule of thumb, you should have two or three times the
   amount of swap space as physical memory.

Adding swap without expanding the swap partition

   There are two ways to add swap space to a system without altering the existing swap partition. One
   way is to use a swap partition on another drive, the other is to use a swap file.

   To use another hard drive, create a partition of type "Linux swap" (code 82) and then run the
   "mkswap" command to prepare the swap space:
   mkswap /dev/sdb2

   Where /dev/sdb2 is the name of the partition you created. To use the swap space immediately use the
   "swapon" command:
   swapon /dev/sdb2

   Use "swapon -s" to get a list of the currently used swap spaces. To permanently add the swap space to
   the system, you will need to edit the /etc/fstab file and add a line similar to this:
   /dev/sdb2       none    swap    sw      0       0

   If your system is using unique identifiers to name the disks, use the blkid command to get a list of
   ids for the devices. The line to mount the swap space in /etc/fstab would then look something like
   this:
   UUID=036da155-1ea1-4392-b8d4-700f65aa1ead  none  swap  sw  0  0

   To use a file for swap, create a large blank file (using dd) on the filesystem that you want to use
   for swapping. For example, to create a 1GB file, type:
   dd if=/dev/zero of=/store/swapfile bs=1024 count=1048576

   Where /store/swapfile is the path to the swap file on the desired filesystem.

   As with the additional swap partition, the file now needs to be prepared with mkswap and then used
   with swapon. It also needs to be added to the /etc/fstab file. The procedure is exactly the same as
   above, but you need to use /store/swapfile rather than /dev/sdb2 as the swap space parameter.

Swappiness

   The Linux kernel can be tweaked to define how aggressively it should try to swap processes out of
   memory. This tendency is controlled by a kernel variable called swappiness. A swappiness of 0 means
   that the kernel will avoid swapping as much as possible, while 100 means the kernel will be
   aggressive in how it uses the swap space. The default setting for many Linux distributions is 60. It
   is possible to change the number dynamically using this command:
   sudo sysctl vm.swappiness=10

   To permanently set a value, you need to change (or add, if it doesn't exist) the vm.swappiness
   variable in the /etc/sysctl.conf file.
