filename: swap-do-we-need-swap-partition-multif_20150304.txt
http://linux.about.com/od/howtos/fl/Do-You-Need-A-Swap-Partition.htm

   A question that is commonly asked when installing Linux is "Do I need a swap partition?".

   In this article I am going to explain what a swap partition is used for and then I am going
   to let you decide whether you need on or not.

   Memory is a bit like a shopping centre car park. At the beginning of the day the car park
   will be empty and there will be lots of spaces available. As people start arriving more and
   more spaces are used up and eventually the car park will be full.

   At this point there are a couple of things that can happen. You can either stop any more
   cars entering the car park until spaces become available or you force some of the cars to
   leave thereby releasing spaces.

   In computing terms when you first start using your computer you should have most of your
   memory available. The only memory being used will be from processes required by the
   operating system. Every time you load an application a new process will start and a set
   amount of memory will be set aside for the application.

   Every time you load a new application less memory will be available to run that program and
   eventually you will get to the point whereby there isn't enough left to run that
   application.

   So what does the Linux do when there isn't enough memory left?

   It starts killing off processes. This isn't something you really want to happen. Whilst
   there is a scoring mechanism for choosing which processes to kill you are basically leaving
   the decision up to your operating system and taking it out of your own hands.

   Linux will only start killing off processes when virtual memory runs out. What is virtual
   memory? Virtual memory is the amount of physical RAM + any disk space set aside for paging
   purposes (swap).

   Think of a swap partition as an overflow car park. When all of the main car parking spaces
   are full the overflow car park can be used for additional space. There is of course a
   downside to using an overflow car park. Generally the overflow car park is further away
   from the actual shopping centre and so drivers and passengers have to walk further to the
   shops which is time consuming.

   You can [101]create a swap partition which will be used by Linux to store idle processes
   when the physical RAM is getting low. The swap partition is basically disk space set aside
   on your hard drive. (Much like an overflow car park).

   It is obviously much quicker accessing RAM than files stored on your hard drive. If you
   find that you are constantly running out of memory and your hard drive is whirring it is
   likely that you are excessively using swap space.

   So how badly do you need a swap partition?

   If you have a computer with a small amount of memory in the first place then it is highly
   recommended.

   As a test I set up a virtual machine with 1 gigabyte of RAM and no swap partition. I
   installed [102]Peppermint Linux which uses the LXDE desktop and overall it has a low memory
   footprint.

   The reason I used Peppermint Linux is that it comes with [103]Chromium pre-installed and
   every time you open a Chromium tab a decent amount of memory is used.

   I opened a tab and navigated to [104]linux.about.com. I then opened a 2nd tab and did the
   same. I kept repeating this process until eventually the memory ran out. The image above
   shows what happened next. Chromium basically displays a message stating that the tab has
   stopped working and this is probably due to lack of memory.

   I then [105]set up a new virtual machine with 1 gigabyte of RAM and an 8 gigabyte swap
   partition. I was able to open tab after tab after tab and although the physical RAM had run
   low the swap space started to be used and I was able to continue opening tabs.

   Clearly if you have a machine with 1 gigabyte of RAM you are more likely to require a swap
   partition than if you have a machine with 16 gigabytes of RAM. It is highly likely that you
   will never use the swap space on a machine with 8 gigabytes of RAM or more unless you do
   some serious number crunching or [106]video editing.

   I would however always recommending having a swap partition. Disk space is cheap. Set some
   of it aside as an overdraft for when you are running low on memory.

   If you find that your computer is always low on memory and that you are constantly using
   swap space it might be time to think about [107]upgrading the memory on your computer.

   If you have already installed Linux and you didn't set up a swap partition all is not lost.
   It is possible instead to [108]create a swap file which basically achieves the same goal.

   Can I set aside space on my SSD for swap space?

   You can set aside space on an SSD for swap space and in theory it will be much quicker to
   access that partition than on a traditional hard drive. SSDs do have a limited life span
   and can only handle a certain number of reads and writes. To put things into perspective
   that number is actually very high and your SSD will probably outlast the life of your
   computer.

   Remember swap space is supposed to be an overflow buffer and not used consistently. As
   mentioned before if you find that you are constantly using the swap partition consider
   upgrading the memory.



---
http://linux.about.com/od/lsa_guide/a/gdelsa40.htm

6.2. Creating a swap space

   A swap file is an ordinary file; it is in no way special to the kernel. The only thing that
   matters to the kernel is that it has no holes, and that it is prepared for use with mkswap
   . It must reside on a local disk, however; it can't reside in a filesystem that has been
   mounted over NFS due to implementation reasons.

   The bit about holes is important. The swap file reserves the disk space so that the kernel
   can quickly swap out a page without having to go through all the things that are necessary
   when allocating a disk sector to a file. The kernel merely uses any sectors that have
   already been allocated to the file. Because a hole in a file means that there are no disk
   sectors allocated (for that place in the file), it is not good for the kernel to try to use
   them.

   One good way to create the swap file without holes is through the following command:


 $ dd if=/dev/zero of=/extra-swap bs=1024 count=1024
 1024+0 records in 1024+0 records out
 $

   where /extra-swap is the name of the swap file and the size of is given after the count= .
   It is best for the size to be a multiple of 4, because the kernel writes out memory pages ,
   which are 4 kilobytes in size. If the size is not a multiple of 4, the last couple of
   kilobytes may be unused.

   A swap partition is also not special in any way. You create it just like any other
   partition; the only difference is that it is used as a raw partition, that is, it will not
   contain any filesystem at all. It is a good idea to mark swap partitions as type 82 (Linux
   swap) ; this will the make partition listings clearer, even though it is not strictly
   necessary to the kernel.

   After you have created a swap file or a swap partition, you need to write a signature to
   its beginning; this contains some administrative information and is used by the kernel. The
   command to do this is mkswap , used like this:


 $ mkswap /extra-swap 1024
 Setting up swapspace, size = 1044480 bytes
 $

   Note that the swap space is still not in use yet: it exists, but the kernel does not use it
   to provide virtual memory.

   You should be very careful when using mkswap , since it does not check that the file or
   partition isn't used for anything else. You can easily overwrite important files and
   partitions with mkswap ! Fortunately, you should only need to use mkswap when you install
   your system.

   The Linux memory manager limits the size of each swap space to 2 GB. You can, however, use
   up to 8 swap spaces simultaneously, for a total of 16GB.
