filename: things-to-do-after-installing-ubuntu-14-04-trusty-tahr_20140425.txt
http://scienceblogs.com/gregladen/2014/04/24/10-or-20-things-to-do-after-installing-ubuntu-14-04-trusty-tahr/

10 Or 20 Things To Do After Installing Ubuntu 14.04 Trusty Tahr

   Ubuntu 14.04 Trusty Tahr has just been released, and I'm sure you are about to install it.
   I've put together a few ideas for what to do after installation in order to make it work
   better for you. You'll find that below. First, a bit of ranty background.

Rant

   Originally, Ubuntu was a great thing. Years ago I used a Unix like system for various
   things and got comfortable with what we now call the "command line." Then I used DOS, and
   that was still a command line operating system (but with different commands) and that was
   pretty good for the late 20th century. Then Windows came out and I switched to that, and
   later used both Windows and Mac operating systems to do my work. Eventually, I wanted to
   get away from those proprietary operating systems and try out Linux, which by then was a
   Unix like system that had windowing capabilities but also a powerful command line
   interface.

   So, I got a spare computer and installed Fedora. Couldn't get it to work. I tried SUSE and
   a couple of other systems, but there was a problem with each one of them. In order to get
   past the installation and configuration -- to the extent that the computer would do silly
   things like print, or hook up to a network -- I needed to already know all the stuff that I
   was confident I would eventually learn, once I got the system set up. It was a Catch 22
   situation.

   At one point I came across a new version of Linux called Ubuntu, and the fact that it was
   from South Africa interested me because I was at the time doing quit a bit of work in South
   Africa, so that was cool. But the Ubuntu servers were always overloaded and I could never
   download it. I think I tried one other version of Linux after that, and then decided to
   give up on Linux because that didn't work for me either.

   But just before I gave up, I tried downloading Ubuntu one more time. And it downloaded. And
   I installed it and the installation was seamless, and everything worked. And I saw it. And
   it was good.

   Although I messed around with a few other versions of Linux, just for fun, I mainly kept
   installing various versions of Ubuntu, playing around with all of the know desktops but
   always coming back to gnome. I became reasonably good (but not high level) at working with
   Linux on the desktop, spent some effort promoting the operating system, and in short order
   I stopped using Windows (unless forced to do so) but still using a Mac now and then. I
   currently use a mac desktop for most things, a Linux laptop as my laptop, and a Linux
   server for specialized tasks. Every now and then Huxley asks me "Daddy, why do you have
   nine computers?" and I say "Huxley, I only have six computers, those extra monitors are
   hooked more than one to a computer in some cases." And he responds "You don't need nine
   computers, daddy." Kids these days...

   Anyway, then Unity came along and for this reason and other reasons Ubuntu became more
   annoying rather than less annoying with each release. For example, there are applications
   that now only work with Unity. This may be less true now than it was two months ago, last
   time I checked, but the Evernote clone for Linux, Everpad, would not give me menus in a
   non-Unity environment because it was designed to be broken when run in anything other than
   Ubuntu with Unity. That sort of thing is very annoying. If you want to have some
   alternative non Ubuntu-approved desktops AND Unity working on one computer, you have to
   cheat and mess around and trick the computer in to letting you do it. It is no longer safe
   to install Ubuntu as your basic operating system then configure the computer "exactly how
   you want it" (a mantra for Linux users) by swapping around desktops and other
   functionality. Also, Ubuntu took Nautilus, which had evolved to be one of the best file
   managers around, and removed some of its great features and made it one of the dumbest file
   managers around. And, the Unity Dashboard eventually became like that big gift shop at most
   museums these days ... all exits lead through the gift shop.

   One of the most annoying things about Unity is the disappearing menus that are no longer
   located on the application title bar. Both being not where I want them and invisible is
   incredibly annoying. All disappearing menus are stupid and anti-productive and anyone who
   does not realize that is a sheep. Baa..

   And another thing. The simple act of creating an application launcher for your launching
   bar/thingie became difficult with Ubuntu. This meant that two or three of my most commonly
   used applications could not be launched the way I wanted them to be launched by using a
   simple tweak. It turns out that getting desktop launchers to work isn't that hard, but
   dammit, why did I have to learn a whole new procedure that is five times more complicated
   than the old procedure, giving me nothing new, just because Mark Shutleworth never thought
   of launching emacs with a standard blank file to make his life easier? WHY???

   But then Ubuntu Long Term Release 14.04. If you read about this release on the Internet,
   you'll notice that people often say "nothing big in this new release, pretty much the same
   as the old release" but that is not true. One of the big differences is that you can now
   configure Unity to use normal menus. That is big. Also, somewhere along the way Ubuntu One
   came (I never got it to work for me either functionally or adaptively) so I couldn't care
   less, but it is now gone so that is one annoying thing that has disappeared. Plus, by now,
   methods of removing other annoying features of Unity have developed nicely.

   The irony of all this is that when you install Ubuntu 14.04 with Unity and you want it to
   be a sane operating system, there is a long list of things you may want to do to. I've
   culled suggestions from a number of helpful web sites (all listed below) and put them in a
   reasonable order. If you want to do these things, you might consider running through the
   list and adding all the repositories at once, then doing a sudo apt-get install update
   command, rather than doing the latter after every one of the former, to save time. I've not
   fully tested everything here. I.e., I've installed Skype but I've not tested it. Also, I
   did these things on a system that was already tweaked so several of these things were
   already done, but I did them again anyway. That mostly resulted in "you've already
   installed that software, dummy" notices, but at least nothing broke.

   I opted or command line suggestions for most of these items, though a few send you to the
   system preferences, etc.

   So here's what I did, and what you may want to do. I guarantee nothing. Good luck.

Make available some important repositories that are probably turned off

   Use the dash to open Software and Updates

   Go to other software and check cannonical parters and probably everything else that looks
   important, unless it is something Ubuntu turned off that you had previously included. I
   don't know what to do about those repositories. You may be asked to approve reloading the
   cash, or you can do this, or both:

   sudo apt-get update

While you are in Software and Updates, check for additional drivers

   Check in software and updates for additional drivers, under the "additional drivers" tab.
   Do something smart with what you find there. I did nothing but you may want to. Be careful.

   sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get upgrade

Install multimedia codecs

   sudo apt-get install ubuntu-restricted-extras

Install several useful software items:

VLC media player:

   sudo apt-get install vlc

Install rar. I don't know what this is but a lot of people seem to recommend it

   sudo apt-get install rar

gimp image manipulation program

   sudo apt-get install gimp

gnome tweak tool and unity tweek tool

   sudo apt-get install gnome-tweak-tool

   sudo apt-get install unity-tweak-tool

Install pidgin if you want.

   I didn't but a lot of people like it.

   sudo apt-get install pidgin

Install skype

   Install Skype if you want. This is a huge installation and will take a few minutes.

   sudo sh -c `echo "deb http://archive.canonical.com/ quantal partner" >>
   /etc/apt/sources.list'
   sudo apt-get update
   sudo apt-get install skype

Install Java

   sudo apt-get install icedtea-7-plugin openjdk-7-jre

Install extra applets

   I've not entirely figured out the applets yet. They go on the menu bar, called the panel,
   along the top of Unity's screen. There are few recommended tweaks and so far I've liked
   them. For some of these, you run it from command line and it becomes part of the panel. For
   others, you have to run it from the Dash. For some, when you run the app from the command
   line the program that puts it on the panel keeps running, so when you exit the terminal or
   terminate the program, the applet disappears. For some the applet ends up on the panel, for
   some there is an opening application that shows up and requires configuration then the
   applet goes in the panel, for others the applet is ready to go next time you log in but
   won't show up until then. In other words, there is no standard for how applets are created
   or installed. I refer to the rant at the top of the page. Ubuntu. A "South African Language
   Word for `WTF'"

   sudo apt-get install diodon diodon-plugins

Calendar indicator

   This is actually one of the coolest applets. My own calendar is relatively sparse; for many
   days there is nothing at all, but everything on my calendar is very important, of course.
   The best way to view a sparse calendar is using the "agenda" method, where days that have
   nothing on them don't even show up and everything is a list. This calendar indicator does
   that. The problem is, it does not stick itself to the panel unless you select "autostart"
   in the preferences after you've started it up from DASH.

   sudo add-apt-repository ppa:atareao/atareao
   sudo apt-get update
   sudo apt-get install calendar-indicator

Install a weather indicator

   This is an excellent indicator for weather.

   sudo add-apt-repository ppa:atareao/atareao
   sudo apt-get update
   sudo apt-get install my-weather-indicator

Install Copy (instead of Dropbox)

   Copy is a less expensive alternative to Dropbox. [21]You should give it a try.

Install dropbox and the app indicator

   I've not gotten the app indicator to work, but this is the recommended procedure. I'm
   probably missing something. Truth be told, I'm not sure if dropbox is working on my laptop
   at all at the moment. Let me know how it goes with you.

   sudo apt-get install dropbox

   then you might have to do this to get an indicator;

   sudo apt-get install libappindicator1

   But if you are like me that won't work. In fact, while Dropbox seems to work on Ububuntu
   14.04 unity, autostart does not work; I'm prompted for my system password to start Dropbox
   on login. For now I think I'll wait to try to figure out how to get the icon going until
   this all gets resolved, presumably in one fell swoop. But, again, see rant above: how does
   Ubuntu fell about itself, killing off Ubuntu One at the same time it makes Dropbox harder
   to use. Do we users not count? Jeesh.

   Anyway, if you want to verify that Dropbox is working, go to the command line and type in

   dropbox -h

   and you'll get a list of commands that will allow you to play around with it, including

   dropbox status

   which will tell you if it is running.

Install classic menu indicator

   This is a pretty important applet. With this applet in place you might even consider
   setting the Unity launcher bar on autohide! It is the standard debian style menu. I
   recommend going into preferences and changing the icon to the standard (Ubuntu) icon so you
   know what the heck it is a few days after installing it.

   sudo add-apt-repository ppa:diesch/testing
   sudo apt-get update
   sudo apt-get install classicmenu-indicator

Remove keyboard indicator

   The keyboard langauge is indicated on your panel. Why? If this annoys you you can remove
   it.

   System Settings-> Text Entry and uncheck the Show current input source in the menu bar.

Fix screen brightness controls

   On some computers, including mine apparently, Ubuntu broke the ability to change the
   brightness of the screen. It can be fixed. I've not tried it, but you can [22]check out
   this web page for instructions on how to do that. Good luck.

Add a nifty system load indicator

   sudo apt-get install indicator-multiload

Fix the obnoxious stuff on the Unity Dash

   You don't want Ubuntu telling you to buy stuff at Amazon and all that other dumbass stuff
   it does? This and other annoyances can be fixed.

   Go to Settings, security and privacy, and then turn that stuff off. You should turn off
   "include online seach results" and you may want to turn off the thingie that shows your
   recently open documents. All this clutters up the dashboard, but if you want this
   information there, by all means leave it.

   Get rid of the shopping suggestions with this code at the console:

   gsettings set com.canonical.Unity.Lenses disabled-scopes "[`more_suggestions-amazon.scope',
   `more_suggestions-u1ms.scope', `more_suggestions-populartracks.scope',
   `music-musicstore.scope', `more_suggestions-ebay.scope',
   `more_suggestions-ubuntushop.scope', `more_suggestions-skimlinks.scope']"

   Disable online searches from dash with
   wget -q -O - https://fixubuntu.com/fixubuntu.sh | bash

Fix overheating and extend battery life

   There is a good chance Ubuntu is not handling your fan, battery, etc. optimally but there
   is a nifty utility that probably will. Do this:

   sudo add-apt-repository ppa:linrunner/tlp
   sudo apt-get update
   sudo apt-get install tlp tlp-rdw
   sudo tlp start

Install Dolphin

   Just go to Synaptic package manager or Ubuntu software center and install Dolphin file
   manager. Other folks are suggesting sunfish, but I don't recommend it. At the moment,
   Dolphin is the only file manager I'd recommend for Ubuntu. I'm still waiting for a good
   file manager to come out.

Install Compiz settings manager

   sudo apt-get install
   sudo apt-get install compizconfig-settings-manager

   Then, after you've installed it, DON'T TOUCH IT.

Disable the boneheaded overlay scrollbars

   What is more annoying than disappearing menus? Disappearing scroll bars that are located at
   a specific position that YOU CAN'T KNOW WHAT IT IS BECAUSE YOU CAN'T SEE IT. Get rid of
   that.

   gsettings set com.canonical.desktop.interface scrollbar-mode normal

Put the username back on the the panel

   Why Ubuntu thinks you need to know what keyboard is running but not which user is behind
   the keyboard is an enigma wrapped in a riddle.

   gsettings set com.canonical.indicator.session show-real-name-on-panel true

Install Adobe Flash plugin

   sudo apt-get install flashplugin-installer

   The, spend the next hour trying to get that to work consistently.

Install some Codecs and Enable DVD Playback:

   sudo apt-get install gstreamer0.10-plugins-ugly libxine1-ffmpeg gxine mencoder libdvdread4
   totem-mozilla icedax tagtool easytag id3tool lame nautilus-script-audio-convert libmad0
   mpg321 libavcodec-extra

   sudo /usr/share/doc/libdvdread4/install-css.sh

Add workspaces

   Type "appearances" at the dash (or get there from system settings), click behavior, show
   workspaces. A violation of the Prime Directive (have no widgets on the launcher because we
   broke that) will happen and a widget will appear on the launcher that shows you what
   workspace you are in and gives you a workspace switcher.

Integrate Twitter, Facebook, etc.

   Configure social media with "online accounts" from the dashboard

Make some customized launcers

   Use [23]these instructions to set up launcher icon thingies in your unity launcher for apps
   that require special conditions not already installed. For example, I have emacs open with
   a file from the desktop called "blank.txt" which is sometimes blank and sometimes just
   contains the last stuff I wrote into that file.

   That is all.
