filename: top-things-to-do-after-installing-ubuntu-15-04_20150423.txt
http://www.unixmen.com/top-things-to-do-after-installing-ubuntu-15-04/

Top Things To Do After Installing Ubuntu 15.04

   Please share[34] Share on Facebook [35]Share on Google+ [36]Tweet about this on Twitter [37]Share on
   LinkedIn [38]Share on Reddit [39]Digg this [40]Share on StumbleUpon

   Ubuntu 15.04 final beta is already out couple of weeks before. The final version of Ubuntu 15.04 will
   be released on coming April 23, 2015. Check the release notes for more details.
     * [41]Ubuntu 15.04 Final Beta, And It’s Official Flavours Are available For Download

   This comprehensive tutorial describes how can we enhance Ubuntu 15.04, and other older versions such
   as Ubuntu 14.10/14.04/13.10/13.04/12.10/12.04 etc., further for day to day activities. Also, this
   article will show you some interesting insights and ideas about what you can and should do after a
   successful installation of Ubuntu latest desktop version.

   If you already use previous release of Ubuntu, and want to upgrade to the current latest version,
   then please refer the below link.
     * [42]How To Upgrade To Ubuntu 15.04 Vivid Vervet From Ubuntu 14.10 Utopic Unicorn

1. Preparing your Ubuntu desktop

1.1 Update System

   The first and foremost thing to do is update/upgrade software repositories and make sure your systems
   contains latest versions of all software.

   To do that, run:
sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get upgrade

1.2 Install Antivirus

   Sounds crazy. But, you must know, Linux is not completely virus-free distribution. Your system might
   got affected sometimes by viruses.

   To install and configure Antivirus, refer the following link.
     * [43]Install AVG Free Antivirus On Ubuntu

   If sound is not working, [44]check our previous post to resolve the issue.

2. Configure And Tweak Ubuntu

2.1 Disable Unity Dash Online Search feature

   Whenever you type in Unity Dash to search for an application or a file in your computer, your search
   terms will be automatically sent to third parties such as Amazon, and the third parties will display
   the relevant results, mostly ads, depending upon your search terms. If you don’t like this feature,
   and feel this is really annoying, you can disable it.

   To disable the Unity online search feature, refer the following link.
     * [45]How to disable the Unity Online search feature In Ubuntu

2.2 Enable Workspaces

   Starting from Ubuntu 13.04 version, moving between workspace feature has been disabled by default.
   So, you can’t switch to other workspaces by using the key combinations: CTRL+ALT+[Left/Right/Up/Down]
   Arrow keys. Refer the following link to neable Work spaces in Ubuntu.
     * [46]How to Enable Workspaces On Ubuntu

2.3 Ubuntu Tweak

   Ubuntu Tweak is a must have application for Ubuntu and it’s derivatives. It is an application to
   configure Ubuntu easier for everyone. It provides many useful desktop and system options that the
   default desktop environment doesn’t provide. Using Ubuntu Tweak you can install all needed
   applications with a simple click, you can change the window buttons from Left to right…etc.

   Read our previous to know how to install and use Ubuntu Tweak.
     * [47]How to install and use Ubuntu Tweak on Ubuntu 12.04 and newer

   Also, read our [48]Interview with Ding Zhou of Ubuntu Tweak.

2.4 Ubuntu After Install

   Like Ubuntu Tweak, there is an another similar tool called “Ubuntu After install” available. Ubuntu
   After Install is a tool that can be used to install some of the best and essential software after
   installing the Ubuntu desktop. It has a bunch of useful applications, and will automate the
   installation process on a newly installed machine to get near perfect desktop. I would not say a
   complete desktop for all users, but a near perfect desktop. This tool saves your time and effort, and
   installs all latest versions of softwares by automatically adding the respective PPA’s to keep the
   installed softwares up to date on your Ubuntu system.

   For more details about installation and usage of Ubuntu After Install, check the following link.
     * [49]Ubuntu After Install – Automate the installation of all popular softwares on ubuntu

2.5 PostInstallerF

   PostInstallerF is a small, lightweight, useful tool that can be used to install 100+ essential
   softwares, Games, audio/video codecs, and third-party repositories which are not included by default
   in Fedora, Ubuntu and Manjaro.
     * [50]PostInstallerF – A Post Installer Tool To Make A Perfect, Full-fledged Fedora, Ubuntu, And
       Manjaro Distro

   The above tools are just enough to configure a perfect Ubuntu desktop for daily usage. These tools
   comes with bundle of several essential and daily usage applications. So, you can omit almost 75% of
   this article steps.

   If you want to install all softwares step by step, follow the below steps.

3. Desktop Environments

3.1 Cinnamon

   Cinnamon is a GNOME 3 fork that allow you to have a panel at the bottom with a classic Menu, this is
   useful for people that want to use Ubuntu with a classic Bottom Menu.

   Cinnamon latest version for Ubuntu 14.04 is not yet ported to the stable PPA, however we can install
   it using nightly builds which is not recommended for the production system.

   If you want to install the most recent version of cinnamon, then follow the steps below.
sudo apt-get install cinnamon-desktop-environment

   Logout from the current session and select Cinnamon as your desktop session at the user login prompt.
   Now you’ll able to get the Cinnamon Desktop Environment.

   [51]Menu_003

3.2 Gnome

   To install GNOME 3 in Ubuntu 14.10, enter the following command:
sudo apt-get install gnome-shell ubuntu-gnome-desktop

   During installation, the installer will ask you to select the login manager of your choice (LightDM
   is the default Unity manager and GDM is the GNOME default — Both will work).

3.3 LXQt

   LXQt is the Qt port and the upcoming version of [52]LXDE, the Lightweight Desktop Environment. It is
   the product of the merge between the LXDE-Qt and the Razor-qt projects: A lightweight, modular,
   blazing-fast and user-friendly desktop environment.
     * [53]LXQt 0.7.0 – Next Generation Qt Lightweight Desktop Environment

3.4 MATE Desktop

   The MATE Desktop Environment is the continuation of GNOME 2. It provides an intuitive and attractive
   desktop environment using traditional metaphors for Linux and other Unix-like operating systems.

   To install MATE desktop in Ubuntu, run:
sudo apt-get install ubuntu-mate-desktop

   [54]Ubuntu 15.04 MATE desktop

4. Configure Online Accounts

   Want to setup your online accounts (Facebook, twitter.. etc.) on your Ubuntu system? Click on the
   gear button on the top right corner and select System Settings.

   [55]Menu_005

   Then, select Online Accounts (see below).

   [56]System Settings_001

   Now setup your online accounts and get notifications in Ubuntu. For example, if you want to add your
   Facebook account, click on the Facebook icon.

   [57]Online Accounts_007

   Enter your facebook username and password, and click Log in to authorize.

   [58]Online Accounts_009

5. System Monitoring & Eye Candy Tools

5.1 Conky

   Conky is a free, light-weight system monitor for X, that displays any information on your desktop.
   There are many nice themes available for conky that can display clock, CPU usage, RAM usage, swap,
   disk, net and more. Check [59]our previous post for installation and configuration of conky in
   Ubuntu.

5.2 Don’t like the default icons, Wanna try some cool icons?

   Try the following cool Icon collections.

   Want to change the default icons to something that match your taste? [60]Check this nice collection
   of icons for Ubuntu (PPA included).

6. Multimedia

6.1 VLC Media Player

   VLC is the best media player for Linux it play almost everything, it has many features that you can
   not find in any other media player, read this post if you want to know what VLC can do: [61]25 things
   you can do with VLC Media player!

   You can install VLC from Ubuntu Software Center or via terminal by using the following command:
sudo apt-get install vlc

   Or install the most recent version 2.1.1 using the following PPA.
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:videolan/stable-daily
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install vlc

6.2 Kodi

   Kodi, formerly known as XBMC, is an award-winning free and open source (GPL) software media player
   and entertainment hub for digital media. XBMC is available for Linux, OS X, Windows, and the original
   Xbox. While XBMC functions very well as a standard media player application for your computer, it has
   been designed to be the perfect companion for your HTPC. Supporting an almost endless range of remote
   controls, and combined with its beautiful interface and powerful skinning engine, XBMC feels very
   natural to use from the couch and is the ideal solution for your home theater.

   Open terminal and copy the following commands:
sudo apt-get install xbmc

6.3 Openshot video editor

   Openshot, the best existing actually for Linux. You can install Openshot from Ubuntu Software Center,
   but if you want to install the latest release, you can do that by adding the following repositories:
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:openshot.developers/ppa
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install openshot openshot-doc
     * Read also our [62]interview with Jonathan Thomas the main developer of Openshot.

6.4 Handbrake

   Check our previous article to know about the powerful video encoder called “Handbrake”.
     * [63]Encode Movies And Videos Using Handbrake

6.5 HotShots

   HotShots is an application for capturing screens and saving them in a variety of image formats as
   well as adding annotations and graphical data (arrows, lines, texts,…). You can also upload your
   creations to the web (FTP/some web services).
     * [64]Install Hotshots 2.1.0 in Linux Mint, Elementary OS, Ubuntu

6.6 LIVES

   LIVES is a nice open source video editor and VJ tool.
     * [65]How To Install LIVES In Ubuntu In Ubuntu

6.7 Minitube

   Minitube is a YouTube Desktop client to play your YouTube videos in your desktop/laptop without
   having to create a YouTube account. You can watch 1080p HD videos without any stuttering. It provides
   you a TV like experience and consumes less CPU resources, because it does not use Flash Player.
     * [66]Minitube: A YouTube Desktop Application for Linux

6.8 Cheese

   Cheese uses your webcam to take photos and videos, applies fancy special effects and lets you share
   the fun with others. To install cheese on your Ubuntu desktop, enter the following command:
sudo apt-get install cheese

6.9 DigiKam

   digiKam is an advanced digital photo management application for Linux, Windows, and Mac-OSX. It can
   be used by Photographers to view, manage, edit, enhance, organize, tag, and share photographs under
   Linux systems.

   You can easily install it using command:
sudo apt-get install digikam

6.10 Gimp

   If you want to edit images daily on a professional level or just a hobbyist, GIMP comes in handy.
sudo apt-get install gimp gimp-data gimp-plugin-registry gimp-data-extras

7. Install Common Codecs And Enable DVD playback

   Perhaps, installing a few common codecs might give you better playback for your media files.
sudo apt-get install gstreamer0.10-plugins-ugly gxine libdvdread4 icedax tagtool easytag id3tool lame nautilus
-script-audio-convert libmad0 mpg321 gstreamer1.0-libav

   To play encrypted DVDs, the libdvdcss2 package is essential. libdvdcss is a simple library designed
   for accessing DVDs like a block device without having to bother about the decryption.
sudo /usr/share/doc/libdvdread4/./install-css.sh

7.1 Enable Flash Support On Browsers

   For Ubuntu 32 bit & 64 bit: To be able to watch some videos and see flash website in your browser
   (Firefox/Chrome), you need to install flash plugin, go to Ubuntu Software Center and search word
   “flash” and install it.

   Alternatively enter the following command to install flash plugins.
sudo apt-get install flashplugin-installer

8. Torrent Softwares

   Transmission bitTorrent client comes preinstalled with Ubuntu 14.10 by default. If you’re looking for
   some other torrent clients, you may try either one of the following.

8.1 uTorrent

   uTorrent is a lightweight and efficient BitTorrent client for Linux, Windows OS and Mac OS. The
   installation of uTorrent in Linux is different from Windows and Mac OS. In Linux, uTorrent runs as a
   web server. You will access uTorrent from your browser. You should start the uTorrent server in order
   to access it from your browser.

   Check our previous article to know more about uTorrent.
     * [67]How To Install uTorrent Client in Ubuntu/Debian/Linux Mint

8.2 Deluge

   The Deluge application was designed to be a full-featured torrent client. Deluge uses libtorrent in
   its back-end and PyGTK for its user interface and is currently usable on POSIX-compliant operating
   systems. It is intended to bring a native, full-featured client to GTK desktop environments such as
   GNOME and Xfce. An official Windows port is also available.

   Open terminal and type the following commands:
sudo apt-get install deluge

9. Messengers

   Here is the list of recommended Messengers for your system. Don’t install everything. Install one by
   one and pick up the right one for your requirement and delete the rest.

9.1 Pidgin

   The best messenger client and 30 plugins, you can do voice and video chat with friends.

   To install Pidgin, enter the following command:
$ sudo apt-get install pidgin

9.2 Telegram

   Telegram is a popular free Instant messenger application that can be used to chat with your friends
   all over the world.
     * [68]How To Install Telegram Desktop Using PPA

9.3 Facebook Messenger

   Refer our following link to install Facebook messenger in Ubuntu.
     * [69]Install Facebook Desktop Messenger in Ubuntu

9.4 Skype

   Skype is a popular free voice over IP and instant messenger that can be used to text, video and voice
   calls over Internet.

   If you’re want to install Skype, check our previous post.
     * [70]How to install Skype On Ubuntu

9.5 aMSN

   aMSN is a free windows Live Messenger clone. aMSN attempts to emulate the look and feel of Windows
   Live Messenger, and supports many of its features.

   aMSN has many features which are not present in Windows Live Messenger. Users can set alarms, are
   able to see others who have removed them from their contact list, and are able to open many profiles
   at once. It is also very customizable, with extensions and themes available at the main site.

   To install aMsn, enter the following command in your terminal.
$ sudo apt-get install amsn

9.6 Jitsi

   Jitsi is an open source and multi platform audio/video Internet phone and instant messenger written
   in Java. It supports some of the most popular instant messaging and telephony protocols such as SIP,
   Jabber/XMPP (and hence Facebook and Google Talk), AIM, ICQ, MSN, Yahoo! Messenger.

   For details about Jitsi please check our previous article in the following link.
     * [71]Install Jitsi Instant Messenger in Ubuntu

10. Gaming & Emulators

10.1 Steam

   As you may know, Steam is an ultimate gaming platform developed by Valve corporation. Steam is
   available for GNU Linux, Mac OS X and Windows. Recently, Valve has developed and released SteamOS, a
   Linux based distribution built around Steam client. You can either download and install SteamOS on
   your system, or just download and install the steam client to play games on your existing operating
   system.

   To install Steam On Ubuntu 14.04, enter the following command:
sudo apt-get install steam

   Click Ok to continue.

   [72]sk@sk: ~_008

   Accept the License agreement.

   [73]sk@sk: ~_009

   Now, the steam will be installed on your system. Launch it either from Dash or Menu.

   [74]Menu_003

   At the first launch, Steam will check for updates and download and install them if updates available.

   [75]Steam_011

   After updating Steam, you can enter into steam and start playing games.

   [76]Steam_012

   If you don’t have an account, create it using the CREATE NEW ACCOUNT link.

   This is how my Steam dashboard looks.

   [77]Steam_013

10.2 Wine

   Wine enables Linux, Mac, FreeBSD, and Solaris users to run Windows applications without a copy of
   Microsoft Windows. Wine is free software under constant development. Other platforms may benefit as
   well.
sudo apt-get install wine

11. File Sharing Tools

11.1 Samba

   In order to share folders in Ubuntu with other Linux and windows machines in your network, you will
   need to install and configure Samba share, for instructions how to configure Samba in Ubuntu check
   our previous post.
     * [78]Install and Configure Samba share in Ubuntu

11.2 Gigola

   Gigola is an another option to share files between Linux and Windows systems. Unlike Samba, we can
   use Gigola to send files between Linux-to-Linux and Linux-to-Windows systems.

   Learn more about Gigola from the below link.
     * [79]How to Access Remote Linux and Windows Shares with Gigolo

12. Extras & Miscellaneous

12.1 Install Archive Management Apps

   Install the following packages will allow you to deal with almost all and any zip formated files.
sudo apt-get install unace unrar zip unzip p7zip-full p7zip-rar sharutils rar uudeview mpack arj cabextract fi
le-roller

12.2 Install Java

   Java is fast, secure, and reliable programming and computing platform. There are lots of applications
   and websites that will not work unless you have Java installed, and more are created every day. To
   install java simply run the following command from your terminal.
sudo apt-get install openjdk-7-jdk

   If you want to try oracle-java 7, try the following steps.

   First you need to remove OpenJDK for this run the following command from your terminal:
sudo apt-get purge openjdk*

   Now you can install Java 7 by adding the following repository:
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:webupd8team/java
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install oracle-java7-installer

   To remove Java 7, run this in terminal:
 sudo apt-get remove oracle-java7-installer

12.3 FileZilla

   Filezilla is one of the best ftp client for Linux.

   Install it via command line:
sudo apt-get install filezilla

12.4 Dropbox

   Dropbox is a free service that lets you bring all your photos, docs, and videos anywhere. This means
   that any file you save to your Dropbox will automatically save to all your computers, phones and even
   to the [80]Dropbox website.
     * [81]Download the Dropbox package

12.5 Oracle VirtualBox

   If you want to run another OS in a virtual machine, install Virtualbox.

   For installation, [82]follow the instructions in our previous post.

12.6 Install Compiz

   To install Compiz use the following command:
sudo apt-get install compiz compizconfig-settings-manager compiz-plugins

12.7 Install Touchpad-indicator

   Have problems with Touchpad while typing? Why don’t you try Touchpad-indicator, which is used to
   disable Touchpad while typing, or while connecting an external mouse? Check the following link for
   more details.
     * [83]How To Automatically Disable Touchpad while typing On Ubuntu?

12.8 Boot UP Manager(BUM)

   Boot-Up Manager is a Perl-Gtk2 application to manage runlevels configuration of any Ubuntu/Debian
   derivative systems. Using this program we can easily start and stop boot-up scripts, without the
   necessity to handle through complex symbolic links and permissions.

   For more details about BUM, check our previous article in the following link.
     * [84]Manage Startup Services With BUM (Boot-Up Manager) On Ubuntu/Debian

12.9 TLP

   TLP is an advanced power management tool for Linux that gives the settings and tweaks to enhance your
   existing power management automatically without the need to know every technical details. It is
   purely a command-line tool and doesn’t have a GUI. It should work on almost all laptops.

   For more details about TLP, check our previous article in the following link.
     * [85]How to Improve Laptop Battery Life and Usage in Linux Using TLP

12.10 Laptop Mode Tools

   Laptop Mode Tools is a package that can be used to extend your laptop battery life in many ways. It
   enhances the battery life by enabling the Laptop mode feature of Linux Kernel, which lets down the
   hard drive spin of  your Laptop.

   For more details, refer the following link.
     * [86]Laptop Mode Tools: Extend Your Laptop Battery Life

12.11 BleachBit

   BleachBit deletes the unnecessary files, free up cache, delete cookies, clear internet history, shred
   temporary files, delete logs, and discard junk you didn’t know was there. This tool can be used in
   both Windows OS and Linux systems. And it will support the following applications such as Firefox,
   Internet Explorer, Adobe Flash, Google Chrome, Opera, Safari and more. It not only deletes the files,
   but it includes some advanced features such as shredding files to prevent recovery, wiping free disk
   space to hide traces of files deleted by other applications, and vacuuming Firefox to make it faster.

   For more details about BleachBit, check our previous article in the following link.
     * [87]Clean up your systems using BleachBit

12.12 TypeCatcher

   TypeCatcher is an Open Source application developed by Andrew Starr-Bochicchio. It allows you to
   easily download and install Google webfonts for off-line use.

   For more details, refer the following link.
     * [88]TypeCatcher – An easy way to download and install Google fonts

12.13 WinUSB

   WinUSB is simple, open source graphical tool to create Windows installer bootable USB disks using ISO
   images, or real CD/DVD installer disks in Ubuntu and it’s derivatives. Using WinUSB, we can create
   startup disks for Windows Vista, 7, 8, and Windows PE.

   Refer the following link to know more about WinUSB.
     * [89]WinUSB – Create Windows Startup USB Disks On Ubuntu

12.14 MultiSystem

   MultiSystem is a small, Open Source freeware to create a multiboot usb drives from Linux systems.
   Using this utility, we can create any number of bootable Linux distributions in a USB drive.
     * [90]How To Create A Multiboot USB From Ubuntu Using MultiSystem

12.15 OpenTeacher

   OpenTeacher is an opensource application that helps you learn a foreign language vocabulary. Just
   enter some answers and questions in your native and foreign language or download them from internet,
   and OpenTeacher will test and let you know your vocabulary test result.
     * [91]OpenTeacher: Improve Your Foreign Language Vocabulary Skills

13. Desktop Tweaks And Effects

13.1 Variety

   Variety is a wallpaper changer for Ubuntu which is feature-full, yet slim and very easy to use. It
   can automatically download wallpapers from various online sources such as Flickr, Wallbase.cc, World
   sunlight map (a live wallpaper that changes as the day progresses), Wallpapers.net, NASA Astronomy
   Picture of the Day, Desktoppr.co etc.

   To install it under Ubuntu follow our previous post instructions.
     * [92]Automatically Change the Desktop Wallpaper Using Variety on Ubuntu/Linux Mint

13.2 Wallch

   Wallch is an application that can be used to change your Ubuntu (Ubuntu derivatives) desktop
   wallpapers automatically at a particular period of time.

   To install it under Ubuntu follow our previous post instructions.
     * [93]Change Ubuntu Systems Wallpaper Automatically With Wallch

13.3 Plank

   Plank is a simple, and very lightweight dock for Ubuntu and it’s derivatives.

   For more details, refer the following link.
     * [94]Plank – The Lightweight Dock For Ubuntu

13.4 Disable Overlay Scrollbars

   Don’t like Overlay scrollbars, then disable it as shown in the following link.
     * [95]How To Disable Overlay Scrollbars in Ubuntu

13.4 Enable Username On Indicator Panel

   You will notice that your name is not displayed on the indicator bar, in the right top corner of the
   desktop. If you still want enable it; this is very easy to do.
     * [96]How to enable Username On Indicator Panel In Ubuntu

14. Package Management

14.1 App Grid

   App Grid is a light weight alternative for Ubuntu Software Center. It allows you to filter
   applications by installed, pending, categories, name and rating. It is released under proprietary
   license and is available for Ubuntu 12.04, 12.10, 13.04 and 13.10.

   For more details about App Grid, check our previous article in the following link.
     * [97]App Grid: A New Alternative For Ubuntu Software Center

14.2 Aptik

   Aptik is a tool that can be used to simplify the re-installation of packages after doing a clean
   installation of an Ubuntu-based distribution. It can be used while re-installing or upgrading to the
   next Ubuntu/Linux Mint release.

   For more details, refer the following article.
     * [98]Aptik – Backup Your PPAs, Themes, Icons, And Application Settings In Ubuntu

14.3 Apt-fast

   Apt-fast is a “shell script wrapper” for apt-get and aptitude that can drastically improve APT
   download times by downloading packages with multiple connections per package. apt-fast uses aria2c or
   axel download managers to speed up the APT download time. Just like the traditional apt-get package
   manager, apt-fast supports almost all apt-get functions such as install, remove, update, upgrade,
   dist-upgrade etc. And one more notable feature is it supports proxy too.

   Note: apt-fast PPA is not updated to 14.10 yet.

   The installation and usage instructions can be found in the following link.
     * [99]Improve apt-get speed

14.4 Apt-proz & ProZilla

   apt-proz is a shell script similar to apt-fast that increases the download speed of apt-get and
   aptitude by many times (at least for the developer!). While apt-fast uses Axel or aria2c download
   manager, apt-proz uses ProZilla download accelerator instead.

   ProZilla is a full featured command line download accelerator for Linux operating systems. It
   downloads a files by splitting into multiple pieces and downloads them simultaneously form multiple
   connections. It supports pause/resume, http/ftp protocols.

   Note: apt-proz PPA is not updated to 14.10 yet.

   You can find more details of the above tools in the following link.
     * [100]Downloading made easy and fast with Apt-proz & prozilla

14.5 Y PPA Manager

   Y PPA Manager is a GUI tool to easily add PPAs, search a package in all Launchpad PPAs, remove
   duplicate PPAs (only works with separate .list files), backup PPAs and other PPA-related tasks. Check
   out the [101]Launchpad page for a complete features list.
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:webupd8team/y-ppa-manager
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install y-ppa-manager

   Y-PPA-Manager can be launched either from Dash or Menu.

15. System Backup & Restore Applications

   After completing all above things, you might get a perfect desktop. Now, it’s time to backup the
   system settings. In case of any problems, you can safely restore your system to earlier working
   state. Do this step after you got a perfect desktop.

15.1 Systemback

   Systemback is an open source, system backup and restore application. Using Systemback, we can easily
   create backups of system and users configuration files. In case of problems, we can easily restore
   the previous state of the system. There are extra features like system copying, system installation
   and Live system creation.

   Refer the following link to install and configure Systemback on Ubuntu.
     * [102]Systemback – Restore Your Linux Desktop to a previous working state

15.2 TimeShift

   Timeshift a application that provides functionality similar to the System Restore feature in Windows
   and the Time Machine tool in Mac OS. TimeShift protects your system by taking incremental snapshots
   of the file system at regular intervals. These snapshots can be restored later to bring your system
   to the exact state it was in at the time when the snapshot was taken.

   For more details, refer the following link.
     * [103]Timeshift – Restore your linux desktop to previous state

   This one is last important and useful trick. I forgot or lost my Ubuntu desktop password? What to do?
   No worries. The following article describes how to reset password.
     * [104]Reset Forgotten Password In Ubuntu

   That’s all. At this stage, you’ll have a perfect and full fledged Ubuntu 15.04 Desktop.

   Note: Some packages may not install or work in Ubuntu 15.04, because it is still in beta stage. You
   have to wait for few days to get stable packages.
