filename: /c/Users/gregor.redelonghi/Dropbox/ODPRTO/_TXT/VPN-s-multif_20160620.txt
http://lifehacker.com/5940565/why-you-should-start-using-a-vpn-and-how-to-choose-the-best-one-for-your-needs

[18]Why You Should Start Using a VPN (and How to Choose the Best One for Your Needs)

   You may know what a VPN, or Virtual Private Network, is; you probably don't use one. You really
   should be using a VPN, and even if you don't think so now, at some point in the future you may
   consider it as important as your internet connection.

   When we took at look at [57]your five favorite VPN service providers, we noticed a few things. First,
   being the "best" is big business for VPN providers, and they'll fight dirty to be one of them.
   Second, there are so many VPN providers that it's difficult to choose a really good one. VPNs are not
   all created equally, and in this post, we're going to look at what a VPN is, why you want one, and
   how to pick the best one for you. Let's get started.

What Is a VPN?
   Put simply, a [62]Virtual Private Network, or VPN, is a group of computers (or discrete networks)
   networked together over a public network—namely, the internet. Businesses use VPNs to connect remote
   datacenters, and individuals can use VPNs to get access to network resources when they're not
   physically on the same LAN (local area network), or as a method for securing and encrypting their
   communications when they're using an untrusted public network. Photo by [63]Pavel Ignatov
   (Shutterstock).

   When you connect to a VPN, you usually launch a VPN client on your computer (or click a link on a
   special website), log in with your credentials, and your computer exchanges trusted keys with a far
   away server. Once both computers have verified each other as authentic, all of your internet
   communication is encrypted and secured from eavesdropping.

   The most important thing you need to know about a VPN: It secures your computer's internet connection
   to guarantee that all of the data you're sending and receiving is encrypted and secured from prying
   eyes.

   Whether the VPNs you're familiar with are the ones offered by your school or business to help you
   work or stay connected when you're traveling or the ones you pay to get you watch your favorite shows
   in another country as they air, they're all doing the same thing. For much more detail on what VPNs
   are, how they work, and how they're used, [64]check out this How Stuff Works article.
 
Why You Need a VPN, or How You Can Benefit from Using One
   A VPN alone is just a way to bolster your security and access resources on a network you're not
   physically connected to. What you choose to do with a VPN is a different story. Usually, VPN users
   fall into a few separate categories:

     * The student/worker. This person has responsibilities to attend to, and uses a VPN provided by
       their school or company to access resources on their network when they're at home or traveling.
       In most cases, this person already has a free VPN service provided to them, so they're not
       exactly shopping around. Also, if they're worried about security, they can always fire up their
       VPN when using airport or cafe WI-Fi to ensure no one's snooping on their connection. Photo by
       [65]Ed Yourdon.
     * The downloader. Whether they're downloading legally or illegally, this person doesn't want on
       some company's witch-hunt list just because they have a torrenting app installed on their
       computer. VPNs are the only way to stay safe when using something like BitTorrent—[66]everything
       else is just a false sense of security. Better safe than trying to defend yourself in court or
       paying a massive fine for something you may or may not have even done, right?
     * The privacy minded and security advocate. Whether they're a in a strictly monitored environment
       or a completely free and open one, this person uses VPN services to keep their communications
       secure and encrypted and away from prying eyes whether they're at home or abroad. To them,
       unsecured connections mean someone's reading what you say.

     * The globetrotter. This person wants to [67]watch the Olympics live as they happen, without
       dealing with their crummy local networks. They want to check out their favorite TV shows as they
       air instead of waiting for translations or re-broadcasts (or watch the versions aired in other
       countries,) listen to location-restricted streaming internet radio, or want to use a new web
       service or application that looks great but for some reason is limited to a specific country or
       region.
     * Some combination of the above. Odds are, even if you're not one of these people more often than
       not, you're some mix of them depending on what you're doing. In all of these cases, a VPN service
       can be helpful, whether it's just a matter of protecting yourself when you're out and about,
       whether you handle sensitive data for your job and don't want to get fired, or you're just
       covering your own ass from the MPAA.

   Even if none of the above really sound right to you, you can still benefit from using a VPN. You
   should definitely use one when you travel or work on an untrusted network (read: a network you don't
   own, manage, or trust who manages.) That means opening your laptop at the coffee shop and logging in
   to Facebook or using your phone's Wi-Fi to check your email at the airport can all [68]potentially
   put you at risk.

   We've shown you [73]how to build your own VPN for remote gaming and browsing that also protects your
   security, shown you [74]how to make a VPN even more secure, and shown you dozens of services that
   operate free and paid VPNs you can sign up for and use. We've even put the question to [75]you
   [76]several [77]times to tell us which VPN service providers you think are the best. So how do you
   pick a solid VPN service?

   Even if you have no idea what a VPN is (it's a Virtual Private Network), the acronym alone… [81]Read
   more Read more

What Makes for a Good VPN?
   The best VPNs offer a solid balance of features, server location, connectivity protocols, and price.
   Some are great for occasional use, others are geared towards getting around the location restrictions
   companies put on their apps and services, and others are targeted at people who do heavy downloading
   and want a little privacy while they do it. Here's what you should look for.

     * Protocol: When you're researching a VPN, you'll see terms like SSL/TLS (sometimes referred to as
       OpenVPN support,) PPTP, IPSec, L2TP, and other [82]VPN types. We asked Samara Lynn, Lead Analyst
       for Networking and Small Business at PCMag, whether or not a user shopping for a VPN should shop
       for one over another. "SSL is what is commonly used these days. All of these protocols will
       provide a secure connection," she explained, and pointed out that most solutions are invisible to
       the end-user anyway. Strictly, each protocol has its benefits and drawbacks, and if you're
       concerned about this (specifically, [83]PPTP vulnerabilities,) you're probably already aware of
       them. Most users don't need to be concerned about this—corporate users on the other hand, are
       probably all using IPSec or SSL clients anyway.
     * Corporate and Exit Locations: Depending on what you're using a VPN for, your service's
       location—and the exit locations you can choose—are important to consider. If you want to get
       around a location restriction and watch live TV in the UK, for example, you want to make sure
       your VPN service provider has servers in the UK. If you're concerned about privacy or
       state-sponsored snooping, you may want to pick a service operated outside of your home country.
       Similarly, if the service is based on the US, they're subject to US laws, and may be forced to
       turn over usage data to the authorities upon request. Many people make more of this than they
       should (we've seen overseas services turn over their data to friendly governments without any
       hesitation repeatedly), but it's important to make sure a VPN has servers in multiple
       locations—or at least the location you're interested in—when shopping.
     * Logging: When you connect to a VPN, you're trusting the VPN service provider with your data. Your
       communications may be secure from eavesdropping, but other systems on the same VPN—especially the
       operator—can log your data if they choose. If this bothers you (e.g., you're the privacy/security
       advocate or the downloader), make absolutely sure you know your provider's logging policies
       before signing up. This applies to location as well—if your company doesn't keep logs, it may not
       matter as much where it's located. (There's a popular rumor that US-based VPN providers are
       required to log, in case the government wants them. [84]This isn't true, but the government can
       always request whatever data they have if they do log.) For a good list of VPN providers that
       don't log your activities when connected (and many that do), [85]check out this TorrentFreak
       article.

     * Anti-Malware/Anti-Spyware Features: Using a VPN doesn't mean you're invulnerable. You should
       still make sure you're [86]using HTTPS whenever possible, and you should still be careful about
       what you download. Some VPN service providers—especially mobile ones—bundle their clients with
       anti-malware scanners to make sure you're not downloading viruses or trojans. When you're
       shopping, see if the providers you're interested in offer anti-malware protection while you're
       connected. For example, [87]previously mentioned [88]Hotspot Shield offers malware protection to
       its premium users. It may not be a dealbreaker for you, but it's always good to have someone
       watching your back.
     * Mobile Apps: If you're going to spend money on a VPN service provider (or even if you use a free
       one, frankly), you should be able to get a consistent experience across all of your devices. Most
       prominent providers offer desktop and mobile solutions for individual users, and while corporate
       and school networks may be a bit behind the curve here, they're catching up too. Make sure you
       don't have to use two different VPNs with two different policies and agreements just because you
       want to secure your phone along with your laptop.
     * Price: Finally, go into your user agreement with both eyes open. You should read the privacy
       policy for the service you're interested in, and be very aware of the differences between free
       and paid services. For example:
          + Free VPN Providers are more likely to log your activities and serve contextual ads while
            you're connected. They're also more likely to use your usage habits to tailor future ads to
            you, have fewer exit locations, and weak commitments to privacy. They may offer great
            features, but if logging and privacy are important to you, you may want to avoid them.
            However, if you just need quick, painless security while traveling on a budget, they're a
            great option.
          + Subscription VPN Providers usually take your privacy a bit more seriously, since you're
            paying for the service. It's unusual for them to show ads, although whether they do logging
            or store data about your usage varies from company to company. They usually offer free
            trials so you can give the service a shot first, but remember: just because you're paying
            for a service doesn't mean you shouldn't do your homework.

   A mix of features and price make a good VPN, but plenty of bad VPNs masquerade as good ones. Look for
   articles written by trustworthy sources that discuss the merits of each service based on its
   features, versus simple rundowns and user testimonials, which are almost always polluted by a
   combination of fanatical users and corporate bootstrapping in attempt to get their names out to
   potential customers.

Which VPNs Are The Best?
   When we [89]ran our recent Hive Five on VPN service providers, we heard from VPN providers begging to
   be included, angry CEOs who claimed their company was maliciously left out, and others accusing some
   of the contenders of illegal or unethical behavior. We took at look at the poll and the claims, and
   while there's no definitive proof the poll was gamed, we decided to come up with our own top five,
   based on our own research rather than reader feedback, that are great whether you're the privacy
   advocate, the student, or the downloader.

[90]Private Internet Access
   Supports: Windows, OS X, Linux, iOS, Android
   Protocols: SSL, PPTP, IPSec, and L2TP. You can also configure Private Internet Access to work on your
   DD-WRT or Tomato router (via SSL/OpenVPN) for constant security.
   Home Country: United States, and has exit servers in the US, Canada, the UK, Switzerland, Romania,
   and the Netherlands.
   Logging Policies: The service keeps no logs of your activity whatsoever (in fact, the only things
   they do keep are your email address and payment information,) uses shared IPs, and has committed to
   keeping your data private. Price: Pricing starts at $7/mo to $40/yr, and you can read more about
   their [91]plans and pricing here.

[92]proXPN
   Supports: Windows, OS X, iOS
   Protocols: SSL, PPTP.
   Home Country: United States, with exit servers in the US, The Netherlands, Singapore, and the UK.
   Logging Policies: proXPN keeps minimal logs of your activity. proXPN collects your email address,
   payment information (if you're a premium user,) bandwidth usage, connection duration, and
   login/logout times. They've committed to only keeping those logs for 14 days or less, and promise to
   never share their logs with anyone, period.
   Price: proXPN has a free plan, which limits your transfer speeds to 300kpbs and restricts you to one
   exit location (Miami) in the United States. Premium accounts unlock support for PPTP (if you want to
   connect a mobile device or a router,) remove the transfer cap, and allows you to choose from any of
   the company's other exit locations. Premium plans start at $10/mo, and you can read more about their
   [93]pricing and plans here.

[94]TorVPN
   Supports: Windows, OS X, Linux, iOS, Android
   Protocols: SSL (they often refer to it as OpenVPN), PPTP, and full SSH tunneling.
   Home Country: Hungary, with exit servers in Hungary.
   Logging Policies: The service doesn't log your connection aside from bandwidth usage to compare
   against your quota, and your payment details. They also are committed to your privacy, and
   specifically say they won't surrender their data without a Hungarian court order.
   Price: Free TorVPN users are limited to 1GB/mo downloaded before they're cut off, and Premium
   accounts start at 5 EUR/mo ($7mo) for 5GB/mo and go up to 30 EUR/mo ($38/mo) for 100GB. Keep in mind
   they have a no-refunds policy, and that even though you ride the [95]Tor network, they're a separate
   entity from the [96]Tor Project. You can read more about their [97]pricing and plans here.

[98]TorGuard
   Supports: Windows, OS X, Linux, and iOS and Android via built-in VPN
   Protocols: SSL (OpenVPN), PPTP, and L2TP, (with 256 bit security)
   Home Country: Panama, with exit servers in The Netherlands, Romania, Ukraine and Panama.
   Logging Policies: TorGuard wholeheartedly supports privacy, so you can feel a bit more secure that
   your connection is secure and anonymous. They purge their logs daily, and only keep payment
   information and registration info. They don't even keep login/logout times.
   Price: Depending on whether you're the privacy advocate, the downloader, or a combination of the two,
   TorGuard offers plans specifically for anonymity (starting at $6/mo), for torrenting (starting at
   $5/mo), or for overall VPN services ($10/mo). You can read more about TorGuard's [99]pricing and
   plans here.

[100]WiTopia
   Supports: Windows, OS X, Linux, iOS, Android, webOS, Chromebooks.
   Protocols: SSL, PPTP, IPSec, and L2TP (with 256 bit security)
   Home Country: United States, with exit servers in 10 US cities, and countries in Latin and South
   America, Asia, Australia, Europe, Africa, and the Middle East—way too many to list here.
   Logging Policies: WiTopia does not log information that can be attributable to individual users,
   purges logs weekly, and only saves registration information and payment details when you sign up.
   Price: $50/yr to $70/yr depending on the level of encryption and protocols you need. They also sell a
   VPN router you can take with you when you travel. You can read more about WiTopia's [101]pricing and
   plans here.

Alternatively, Roll Your Own VPN
   We've shown you how to [102]roll your own VPN using Hamachi, and even [103]how to set up [104]Privoxy
   to secure your web browsing once you have your personal VPN set up. Hamachi isn't the only option:
   you can also download and configure [105]OpenVPN (a free SSL VPN) on your own home server,, or if you
   have a router that supports it, enable OpenVPN on your home router so you can connect back to it when
   you're abroad. Combined with Privoxy, you get the privacy and anonymity benefits of a VPN without
   spending a dime.

   When you're browsing from a public Wi-Fi connection—like at your favorite coffee shop—anyone…
   [109]Read more Read more

   Both of these options put control in your hands, and while they're not quite as anonymous as
   subscription methods or offer international exit locations, they do give you the the most important
   benefits of a VPN: security, privacy, and anonymity while you're away from home.




---
http://lifehacker.com/5900969/build-your-own-vpn-to-pimp-out-your-gaming-streaming-remote-access-and-oh-yeah-security

[18]Build Your Own VPN to Pimp Out Your Gaming, Streaming, Remote Access, and Oh Yeah, Security

   Even if you have no idea what a VPN is (it's a Virtual Private Network), the acronym alone conjures
   visions of corporate firewalls and other relatively boring things, right? While a VPN is a common
   corporate security tool, it's also one of the coolest things you can set up for personal use that you
   probably have never tried.

   Browsing the web from a coffee shop can be dangerous, but you know that already. Gaming with friends
   over the internet is great, but it's better when it's just you and your friends, right? Wouldn't it
   be nice if you could surf the web anywhere as if you were at home, and game with friends like you
   were all in the same room? That kind of functionality is at the very heart of a VPN, and we're going
   to show you how to set one up. Here's how to get started.

What's a VPN?
   A VPN, or [52]Virtual Private Network, is just a network of computers that are all connected securely
   even though they're in different locations and all using different connection methods. The biggest
   benefit to a VPN is that all of the computers on one are securely connected to one another and their
   traffic encrypted and kept away from prying eyes. Another great benefit to a VPN is that all of the
   computers on one are effectively on the same network, meaning they can communicate as if they were
   right next to one another, plugged in to the same router. Photo by [53]cloki (Shutterstock).

   If security is all you want, sure you can sign up for a free or paid VPN service that will encrypt
   your traffic only, but why throw your money (and trust your privacy and security) into the hands of a
   third party when you can roll your own? It's incredibly easy, and once you have your own personal,
   private VPN, you can browse securely on any network by leveraging your home internet connection, get
   a group of friends together for LAN gaming, get access to all of your music and movies from home with
   ease, and more.

Why You Should Roll Your Own
   We've often discussed the dangers of using unsecured internet connections at coffee shops, airports,
   or other public places, especially if you're planning on doing any browsing or surfing that may be
   considered private. We've warned you of the ubiquitous [54]"Free Public Wi-Fi", explained how [55]you
   can stay safe when you do use public networks, and even outlined [56]how to set up your own private
   VPN with Hamachi.

   Hang out in airports, coffee shops, or other laptop-friendly spots for a while, and you'll… [60]Read
   more Read more

   We're going to build on that second story, where Adam Pash showed us how to set up a proxy and
   Hamachi to protect ourselves when browsing from public places, and extend Hamachi's functionality to
   not just secure surfing, but LAN gaming with friends, secure remote access to your home computers and
   files when you're on the road and on the go, and more. Rolling your own VPN—while ideal for
   security—also gives you access to your home network at any time, and all of the great things that
   come with effectively sitting at home using your Wi-Fi there, when you're actually at home, in a
   coffee shop, or across the country.

Before You Get Started
   [61]Hamachi isn't the only utility that does this—most notably [62]OpenVPN, which is one of [63]your
   favorite VPN tools. However, for our purposes, Hamachi wins for being the most hands-off,
   zero-configuration VPN tool to configure. The others aren't terribly difficult, but Hamachi really is
   easy to install. Before we get started, there are a few prerequisites that will make this solution
   work best for you:
     * You have to have an always-on computer at home.
     * You don't trust, or don't want to use third party VPN services.
     * You don't have an office or school that offers free VPN services..

   If the above sounds about right, and you have a nice sturdy broadband connection at home (remember,
   when you're connected to it, you'll be sending your traffic to your home network and then out again,
   so you may feel a performance hit by double-hopping) then it's time to get started.

Set Up and Configure Hamachi
   Hamachi runs on Windows, OS X, and Linux, so [68]grab the installer for your OS of choice. It comes
   in two flavors: a free (for non-commercial use) version that gives us everything we want (the ability
   to leverage to our home network from anywhere over a secure, encrypted connection), and a paid,
   managed version that does more than you'd likely ever need.

   We don't want to rehash all of the steps that [69]Adam walked through in his post on setting up
   Hamachi and Privoxy for secure browsing—so here's the quick version:
    1. [74]Download Hamachi
    2. Run it. If it's your first time, click the Blue power button to power it on.
    3. Click the Network menu, then select Create a new network, giving your network a name and a good,
       strong password.
    4. Done!

   After you've set up your network on your always-on computer at home, grab your laptop, netbook, or
   any other system you plan to travel with, and install the client there. Instead of creating a new
   network, this time join the one you created (Network > Join an existing network), using the network
   name and password you just generated. That's all there is to it—it really is zero-configuration
   security. Make a note of that network name and password—you'll need it again later. Now those two
   computers can securely access one another from anywhere, and do so as though they're on the same
   local network. (You can add as many computers as you want to the network you just created.)

Protect Your Web Browsing, Anywhere You Roam
   Most people use VPNs to protect their browsing when they're using an unsecured network, like the one
   at your local library or coffee shop. With Hamachi, you can turn turn your always-on system at home
   into a proxy that you can securely browse through when you're there. [75]We suggest (and help you set
   up) [76]Privoxy to handle this, and while it takes a little work, once you're finished, you're good
   to go. You'll effectively be connecting to your home computer, and then asking your home computer to
   feed you any sites or services you want to access, so your browsing may slow down a bit based on
   that—but if you have broadband at home and a good connection to the internet from your always-on
   computer, the slowdown will be worth the added security. The knowledge that you're largely protected
   from snooping by people who may be using [77]tools like Firesheep or [78]Faceniff to sniff out your
   credentials on public networks is a great feeling, and knowing that your connection is secured and
   encrypted goes a long way towards making it more comfortable to check your email, log in to your
   social networks, and generally use the web through your proxy when you're out and about as though you
   were at home (because effectively, you are!) Photo by [79]Ed Yourdon.

Bring Your Friends In On Private LAN Gaming
   Secure browsing isn't the only thing you can do with Hamachi though. Connecting to your home computer
   with Hamachi puts you on an on-demand mesh network with any other computers connected to the same
   network, which is ideal if you and your friends want to effectively LAN party it up without lugging
   your computers to each other's houses. You have the choice with Hamachi to either give out the
   network name and password you created earlier, or you can set up a specific network just for your
   friends to play LAN games together, without forcing you all to try and find slots on a public server
   or desperately try to find each other in whatever matchmaking service your favorite games offer.

   Every computer in your virtual LAN will have to have Hamachi installed, and they'll all have to log
   in to the network with the credentials you supply. One system will have to host the game server (and
   with most games, it's best if that system is the most powerful one with the fastest connection to the
   internet, and ideally one you're not actually using to play the game) and all of the other systems,
   including yours, will connect to it as clients. As far as Hamachi is concerned, as long as it's
   running in the background of all of those systems, you're all set. Keep in mind that here too your
   connection to your friends will be as slow as the slowest system in the group, but again, if you all
   have broadband you should be fine.

Use Hamachi for Zero Configuration Remote Access and Streaming
   Along with secure browsing, running Hamachi at home while you're traveling gives you a great way to
   get access to your files at home without the need for remote desktop tools. If it's just movies,
   music, or photos you're looking for, a shared folder on your home computer will do the trick. If you
   use iTunes, you can use [85]Home Sharing to stream anything in your library at home to the computer
   you have. That means you can relax in your hotel room across the country and stream the movies you
   have downloaded to your HTPC, or stream the music you have stored on your home PC, effortlessly, as
   though you were right there. Photo by [86]myvector (Shutterstock).

   You may not care about streaming music [87]if you're already using one of the many cloud-based music
   services when you're away from home, but when it comes to movies, TV shows, photos, or other media
   that's too much for your Dropbox account, using Hamachi when you're on the go is a great option.
   Speaking of bandwidth, it's worth mentioning here that when you stream movies to your PC while
   connected via Hamachi, you're limited to your upload speed at home, and you are using bandiwidth on
   your home connection—so if you have an ISP that throttles after a certain bandwidth limit (like
   Comcast's 250GB), you may want to exercise some caution.

   You can also get out from under services like [92]GoToMyPC or even [93]LogMeIn Free, made by the same
   people who now manage Hamachi. With Hamachi installed and active, you can remote desktop natively or
   use VNC to connect to any computer on your home network if you want to use it as though you were
   there, all without worrying about port forwarding or tweaking your router to make sure you can
   connect from outside of your network.

Enjoy the Benefits
   These uses just scratch the surface of some of the things you can do with a tool like Hamachi. There
   are caveats, like using bandwidth on your home connection as well as where you are, and the potential
   slowness that comes with being limited by your upload speed at home, but the benefits of a VPN go
   past just accessing the files on your home network and connecting to the internet as though you were
   sitting right there at home. LAN gaming, collaborating on an ad-hoc network with friends or
   coworkers, secure browsing, they're all easy to set up once you have your own VPN up and running.



---
http://lifehacker.com/5902397/how-to-make-vpns-even-more-secure

[18]How to Make Your VPN Even More Secure

   In the past few years, VPN services have hit the big time—especially among [38]BitTorrent users.
   These days more and more internet users see running a privacy enhancing service as a requirement
   rather than just a luxury. They're not always perfect, though. Here are a few tips and tricks that
   can enhance the security of any VPN.

   While simple to set up and use out of the box, it may come as a surprise that the security of [43]VPN
   anonymity services can be improved. Of course, when things run absolutely to plan there's little to
   worry about, but there are occasions where there may be a hiccup or where an extra level of security
   is needed.

Securing Your Privacy When Your VPN Fails
   Ok, so you've purchased your VPN subscription, enabled the service, and you're enjoying your newfound
   levels of privacy. Then—disaster strikes. While you were away from your machine somehow and for some
   unknown reason your VPN disconnected and now snoopers have a clear view of your IP address.

   Fortunately, there are solutions.
   "To protect against the event of VPN failure/disconnection, disable any internet access that does not
   tunnel through your VPN service provider," Andrew from [44]PrivateInternetAccess told TorrentFreak.
   "This can be achieved using specific Firewall rules ([45]Ubuntu) or by [46]changing TCP/IP routes."

   But of course, not everyone wants to spend time with these manual configurations that could
   potentially cause problems if they're not done properly. So, we spoke with the creators of two free
   pieces of software that do the job more easily.

VPNetMon
   "VPNetMon continuously watches the IP addresses of your PC. If the IP address of your VPN is not
   detected anymore, VPNetMon closes specified programs instantly. The program reacts so quickly that a
   new connection through your real IP will not be established by these applications," creator Felix
   told TorrentFreak.

   VPNetMon (Windows) can be downloaded [47]here.

VPNCheck
   "VPNCheck helps you to feel safe if your VPN connection breaks, this is done by shutting down your
   main network connection or programs of your choice and showing a notification box," Jonathan from
   Guavi.com told TorrentFreak. "Basically it constantly looks for a change in your VPN network adapter.
   You can connect to either PPTP or L2TP with VPNCheck."

   VPNCheck (Windows/Linux) can be downloaded [48]here.

Stop DNS Leaks
   When using a VPN service one might expect that all of the user's traffic will go through the privacy
   network, but on rare occasions a phenomenon known as "DNS leakage" might occur. This means that
   rather than using the DNS servers provided by the VPN operator, it's possible that the user's default
   DNS servers will be used instead or otherwise become visible.

   "A DNS leak may happen whenever a DNS query ‘bypasses' the routing table and gateway pushed by the
   OpenVPN server. The trigger on Windows systems may be as simple as a slight delay in the answer from
   the VPN DNS, or the VPN DNS unable to resolve some name," explains Paolo from [49]AirVPN.

   A tool for checking for leaks can be found at [50]DNSLeakTest.com and a solution for fixing any
   problems can be found [51]here. Alternatively, anyone using the pro version of VPNCheck will have
   this feature built in.

Double up your security for extra sensitive data transfers
   What if you don't have 100% trust in your VPN provider and worry that even they might snoop on your
   communications? Admittedly it's a very unusual hypothetical situation, but one with an interesting
   solution.

   "If you don't trust your VPN provider 100%, use two VPNs," explains Felix from VPNetMon. "This way
   you are tunneling your already encrypted connection through another tunnel."

   In Windows this is easily achieved. First, simply set up at least two VPN accounts as normal (if
   you'd like an extra one for testing purposes you can get a free limited account from [52]VPNReactor).
   Then connect to one VPN, and when complete connect to another without disconnecting the first. Like
   magic, a tunnel through a tunnel.

   Its also possible to VPN over TOR, but please please don't use TOR for file-sharing traffic, it's not
   designed for it.

   "VPN over TOR gives several security advantages, for a performance price, above all partition of
   trust," explains Paolo from AirVPN. "In case of betrayal of trust by one party, the anonymity layer
   is not compromised in any way.

   A VPN over TOR tutorial can be found [53]here, further discussion [54]here.

Fix the PPTP / IPv6 Security Flaw
   As [55]revealed here on TorrentFreak in 2010, people using a PPTP VPN and IPv6 are vulnerable to a
   nasty security flaw which means that Windows and Ubuntu users could leak their real IP addresses. The
   following fix comes from Jonathan at VPNCheck.

   For Windows Vista and above:
   Open cmd prompt and type:
netsh interface teredo set state disabled.

   For Ubuntu 10+:
   Copy and paste all four lines into a terminal:
echo "#disable ipv6″ | sudo tee -a /etc/sysctl.conf
echo "net.ipv6.conf.all.disable_ipv6 = 1″ | sudo tee -a /etc/sysctl.conf
echo "net.ipv6.conf.default.disable_ipv6 = 1″ | sudo tee -a /etc/sysctl.conf
echo "net.ipv6.conf.lo.disable_ipv6 = 1″ | sudo tee -a /etc/sysctl.conf

Pay for Your VPN with Untrackable Currency
   "When anonymity is a factor, pay with an un-trackable currency," explains Andrew from
   [56]PrivateInternetAccess.

   "For example, signup for an anonymous e-mail account using Tor and use a Bitcoin Mixer to send
   Bitcoins to a newly generated address in your local wallet. Alternatively, use the [57]Bitcoin-OTC to
   purchase Bitcoins ‘over the counter' from a person, rather than an exchange.

   "Then, use a patched Bitcoin client, such as [58]coderrr's anonymity patch to avoid linking the newly
   generated address to any of your pre-existing Bitcoin addresses."

Only Use VPN Providers that Take Your Privacy Seriously
   We've said this before but it's worth repeating. VPN providers who heavily log are useful if all
   you're concerned about is securely communicating with the Internet through an open public WiFi
   connection, but not beyond that. For a run down of providers who do not log any data which would
   enable a 3rd party to identify a user, see our previous article [59]here.




---
http://computer.howstuffworks.com/vpn.htm

How VPNs Work 1/9

   [58]A VPN connection to a business's main office can help its employees be productive when they're on
   the go. See more computer networking pictures.
   A VPN connection to a business's main office can help its employees be productive when they're on the
   go. See more [59]computer networking pictures.
   Â©[60]iStockphoto.com/PeskyMonkey

   As a business grows, it might expand to multiple shops or offices across the country and around the
   world. To keep things running efficiently, the people working in those locations need a fast, secure
   and reliable way to share information across computer networks. In addition, traveling employees like
   salespeople need an equally secure and reliable way to connect to their business's computer network
   from remote locations.

   One popular technology to accomplish these goals is a VPN (virtual private network). A VPN is a
   private network that uses a public network (usually the [61]Internet) to connect remote sites or
   users together. The VPN uses "virtual" connections [62]routed through the Internet from the
   business's private network to the remote site or employee. By using a VPN, businesses ensure security
   -- anyone intercepting the [63]encrypted data can't read it.

   VPN was not the first technology to make remote connections. Several years ago, the most common way
   to connect computers between multiple offices was by using a leased line. Leased lines, such as
   [69]ISDN (integrated services digital network, 128 Kbps), are private network connections that a
   telecommunications company could lease to its customers. Leased lines provided a company with a way
   to expand its private network beyond its immediate geographic area. These connections form a single
   wide-area network (WAN) for the business. Though leased lines are reliable and secure, the leases are
   expensive, with costs rising as the distance between offices increases.

   Today, the Internet is more accessible than ever before, and Internet service providers (ISPs)
   continue to develop faster and more reliable services at lower costs than leased lines. To take
   advantage of this, most businesses have replaced leased lines with new technologies that use Internet
   connections without sacrificing performance and security. Businesses started by establishing
   intranets, which are private internal networks designed for use only by company employees. Intranets
   enabled distant colleagues to work together through technologies such as [70]desktop sharing. By
   adding a VPN, a business can extend all its intranet's resources to employees working from remote
   offices or their homes.

   This article describes VPN components, technologies, tunneling and security. First, let's explore an
   analogy that describes how a VPN compares to other networking options.




---
http://computer.howstuffworks.com/vpn1.htm

How VPNs Work 2/9

   Imagine that you live on an island in a huge ocean. There are thousands of other islands all around
   you, some very close and others farther away. The common means of travel between islands is via
   ferry. Traveling on the ferry means that you have almost no privacy: Other people can see everything
   you do.

   Let's say that each island represents a private local area network (LAN) and the ocean is the
   [60]Internet. Traveling by ferry is like connecting to a [61]Web server or other device through the
   Internet. You have no control over the wires and routers that make up the Internet, just like you
   have no control over the other people on the ferry. This leaves you susceptible to security issues if
   you're trying to connect two private networks using a public resource.

   Continuing with our analogy, your island decides to build a bridge to another island so that people
   have an easier, more secure and direct way to travel between the two islands. It is expensive to
   build and maintain the bridge, even if the islands are close together. However, the need for a
   reliable, secure path is so great that you do it anyway. Your island would like to connect to yet
   another island that is much farther away, but decides that the costs are simply too much to bear.

   This scenario represents having a leased line. The bridges (leased lines) are separate from the ocean
   (Internet), yet are able to connect the islands (LANs). Companies who choose this option do so
   because of the need for security and reliability in connecting their remote offices. However, if the
   offices are very far apart, the cost can be prohibitively high -- just like trying to build a bridge
   that spans a great distance.

   So how does a VPN fit in? Using our analogy, suppose each inhabitant on your island has a small
   submarine. Let's assume that each submarine has these amazing properties:
     * It's fast.
     * It's easy to take with you wherever you go.
     * It's able to completely hide you from any other boats or submarines.
     * It's dependable.
     * It costs little to add additional submarines to your fleet once you've purchased the first one.

   Although they're traveling in the ocean along with other traffic, the people could travel between
   islands whenever they wanted to with privacy and security. That's essentially how a VPN works. Each
   remote member of your network can communicate in a secure and reliable manner using the Internet as
   the medium to connect to the private LAN. A VPN can grow to accommodate more users and different
   locations much more easily than a leased line. In fact, scalability is a major advantage that VPNs
   have over leased lines. Moreover, the distance doesn't matter, because VPNs can easily connect
   multiple geographic locations worldwide.




---
http://computer.howstuffworks.com/vpn2.htm

How VPNs Work 3/9

   A VPN's purpose is providing a secure and reliable private connection between computer networks over
   an existing public network, typically the Internet. Before looking at the technology that makes a VPN
   possible, let's consider all the benefits and features a business should expect in a VPN.

   A well-designed VPN provides a business with the following benefits:

   A business might not require all these benefits from its VPN, but it should demand the following
   essential VPN features:
     * Security -- The VPN should protect data while it's traveling on the public network. If intruders
       attempt to capture the data, they should be unable to read or use it.
     * Reliability -- Employees and remote offices should be able to connect to the VPN with no trouble
       at any time (unless hours are restricted), and the VPN should provide the same quality of
       connection for each user even when it is handling its maximum number of simultaneous connections.
     * Scalability -- As a business grows, it should be able to extend its VPN services to handle that
       growth without replacing the VPN technology altogether.

   One interesting thing to note about VPNs is that there are no standards about how to set them up.
   This article covers network, authentication and security protocols that provide the features and
   benefits listed above. It also describes how a VPN's components work together. If you're establishing
   your own VPN, though, it's up to you to decide which protocols and components to use and to
   understand how they work together.

   The next two pages describe two common types of VPN. We'll start with the type that's most synonymous
   with the term VPN.




---
http://computer.howstuffworks.com/vpn3.htm

How VPNs Work 4/9

   A remote-access VPN allows individual users to establish secure connections with a remote computer
   network. Those users can access the secure resources on that network as if they were directly plugged
   in to the network's servers. An example of a company that needs a remote-access VPN is a large firm
   with hundreds of salespeople in the field. Another name for this type of VPN is virtual private
   dial-up network (VPDN), acknowledging that in its earliest form, a remote-access VPN required dialing
   in to a server using an analog telephone system.

   There are two components required in a remote-access VPN. The first is a network access server (NAS,
   usually pronounced "nazz" conversationally), also called a media gateway or a remote-access server
   (RAS). (Note: IT professionals also use NAS to mean network-attached storage.) A NAS might be a
   dedicated server, or it might be one of multiple software applications running on a shared server.
   It's a NAS that a user connects to from the [60]Internet in order to use a VPN. The NAS requires that
   user to provide valid credentials to sign in to the VPN. To authenticate the user's credentials, the
   NAS uses either its own authentication process or a separate authentication server running on the
   network.

   The other required component of remote-access VPNs is client software. In other words, employees who
   want to use the VPN from their computers require software on those computers that can establish and
   maintain a connection to the VPN. Most [65]operating systems today have built-in software that can
   connect to remote-access VPNs, though some VPNs might require users to install a specific application
   instead. The client software sets up the tunneled connection to a NAS, which the user indicates by
   its Internet address. The software also manages the encryption required to keep the connection
   secure. You can read more about tunneling and encryption later in this article.

   Large corporations or businesses with knowledgeable IT staff typically purchase, deploy and maintain
   their own remote-access VPNs. Businesses can also choose to outsource their remote-access VPN
   services through an enterprise service provider (ESP). The ESP sets up a NAS for the business and
   keeps that NAS running smoothly.

   A remote-access VPN is great for individual employees, but what about entire branch offices with
   dozens or even hundreds of employees? Next, we'll look at another type of VPN used to keep businesses
   connected LAN-to-LAN.




---
http://computer.howstuffworks.com/vpn4.htm

How VPNs Work 5/9

   A site-to-site VPN allows offices in multiple fixed locations to establish secure connections with
   each other over a public network such as the [60]Internet. Site-to-site VPN extends the company's
   network, making computer resources from one location available to employees at other locations. An
   example of a company that needs a site-to-site VPN is a growing corporation with dozens of branch
   offices around the world.

   There are two types of site-to-site VPNs:

     * Intranet-based -- If a company has one or more remote locations that they wish to join in a
       single private network, they can create an intranet VPN to connect each separate LAN to a single
       WAN.
     * Extranet-based -- When a company has a close relationship with another company (such as a
       partner, supplier or customer), it can build an extranet VPN that connects those companies' LANs.
       This extranet VPN allows the companies to work together in a secure, shared network environment
       while preventing access to their separate [65]intranets.

   Even though the purpose of a site-to-site VPN is different from that of a remote-access VPN, it could
   use some of the same software and equipment. Ideally, though, a site-to-site VPN should eliminate the
   need for each computer to run VPN client software as if it were on a remote-access VPN. Dedicated VPN
   client equipment, described later in this article, can accomplish this goal in a site-to-site VPN.

   Now that you know the two types of VPNs, let's look at how your data is kept secure as it travels
   across a VPN.




---
http://computer.howstuffworks.com/vpn5.htm

How VPNs Work 6/9

   Most VPNs rely on tunneling to create a private network that reaches across the Internet. In our
   article "[60]How does the Internet work?" we describe how each data file is broken into a series of
   [61]packets to be sent and received by computers connected to the Internet. Tunneling is the process
   of placing an entire packet within another packet before it's transported over the Internet. That
   outer packet protects the contents from public view and ensures that the packet moves within a
   virtual tunnel.

   This layering of packets is called encapsulation. Computers or other network devices at both ends of
   the tunnel, called tunnel interfaces, can encapsulate outgoing packets and reopen incoming packets.
   Users (at one end of the tunnel) and IT personnel (at one or both ends of the tunnel) configure the
   tunnel interfaces they're responsible for to use a tunneling protocol. Also called an encapsulation
   protocol, a tunneling protocol is a standardized way to encapsulate packets [source: [62]Microsoft].
   Later in this article, you can read about the different tunneling protocols used by VPNs.

   The purpose of the tunneling protocol is to add a layer of security that protects each packet on its
   journey over the Internet. The packet is traveling with the same transport protocol it would have
   used without the tunnel; this protocol defines how each computer sends and receives data over its
   ISP. Each inner packet still maintains the passenger protocol, such as Internet protocol (IP) or
   AppleTalk, which defines how it travels on the LANs at each end of the tunnel. (See the sidebar for
   more about how computers use common network protocols to communicate.) The tunneling protocol used
   for encapsulation adds a layer of security to protect the packet on its journey over the Internet.

   To better understand the relationships between protocols, think of tunneling as having a computer
   delivered to you by a shipping company. The vendor who is sending you the computer packs the computer
   (passenger protocol) in a box (tunneling protocol). Shippers then place that box on a shipping truck
   (transport protocol) at the vendor's warehouse (one tunnel interface). The truck (transport protocol)
   travels over the highways (Internet) to your home (the other tunnel interface) and delivers the
   computer. You open the box (tunneling protocol) and remove the computer (passenger protocol).

   Now that we've examined data in the tunnel, let's look at the equipment behind each interface.

Getting Networked Computers to Speak the Same Language
   When people first started connecting computers together, they had to decide on a common language that
   computers could understand. Those languages, called network protocols, were developed separately from
   one another, depending on the types of computers on the network. For example, Microsoft networks used
   the NetBEUI between systems running Windows, and Apple networks used AppleTalk. When hybrid networks
   began to emerge, Windows and Apple systems had to add the ability to translate each other's protocols
   in order to work together. With the growth of the Internet, though, computer hardware and software
   were redesigned to use the Internet's native communication protocols. Those protocols make up a
   single protocol stack, meaning several protocols that work together to address different types of
   communication. The Internet uses the TCP/IP protocol stack, and most computers today are capable of
   communicating using TCP/IP protocols.




---
http://computer.howstuffworks.com/vpn6.htm

How VPNs Work 7/9

   While a VPN can be configured on generic computer equipment such as standard servers, most businesses
   opt for dedicated equipment optimized for the VPN and general [61]network security. A small company
   might have all of its VPN equipment on site or, as mentioned earlier, might outsource its VPN
   services to an enterprise service provider. A larger company with branch offices might choose to
   co-locate some of its VPN equipment, meaning that it will set up that equipment in a co-location
   facility (or colo). A colo is a large data center that rents space to businesses that need to set up
   servers and other network equipment on a very fast, highly reliable Internet connection.

   As mentioned earlier, there is no standard that all VPNs follow in terms of their setup. When
   planning or extending a VPN, though, you should consider the following equipment:

     * Network access server -- As previously described, a NAS is responsible for setting up and
       maintaining each tunnel in a remote-access VPN.
     * [66]Firewall -- A firewall provides a strong barrier between your private network and the
       Internet. IT staff can set firewalls to restrict what type of traffic can pass through from the
       Internet onto a LAN, and on what TCP and UDP ports. Even without a VPN, a LAN should include a
       firewall to help protect against malicious Internet traffic.
     * AAA Server -- The acronym stands for the server's three responsibilities: authentication,
       authorization and accounting. For each VPN connection, the AAA server confirms who you are
       (authentication), identifies what you're allowed to access over the connection (authorization)
       and tracks what you do while you're logged in (accounting).

   One widely used standard for AAA servers is Remote Authentication Dial-in User Service (RADIUS).
   Despite its name, RADIUS isn't just for dial-up users. When a RADIUS server is part of a VPN, it
   handles authentication for all connections coming through through the VPN's NAS.

   VPN components can run alongside other software on a shared server, but this is not typical, and it
   could put the security and reliability of the VPN at risk. A small business that isn't outsourcing
   its VPN services might deploy firewall and RADIUS software on generic servers. However, as a
   business's VPN needs increase, so does its need for equipment that's optimized for the VPN. The
   following are dedicated VPN devices a business can add to its network. You can purchase these devices
   from companies that produce network equipment, such as Cisco:
     * VPN Concentrator -- This device replaces an AAA server installed on a generic server. The
       hardware and software work together to establish VPN tunnels and handle large numbers of
       simultaneous connections.
     * VPN-enabled/VPN-optimized Router -- This is a typical router that delegates traffic on a network,
       but with the added feature of routing traffic using protocols specific to VPNs.
     * VPN-enabled Firewall -- This is a conventional firewall protecting traffic between networks, but
       with the added feature of managing traffic using protocols specific to VPNs.
     * VPN Client -- This is software running on a dedicated device that acts as the tunnel interface
       for multiple connections. This setup spares each computer from having to run its own VPN client
       software.

   So far, we've looked at the types of VPNs and the equipment they can use. Next, let's take a closer
   look at the encryption and protocols that VPN components use.




---
http://computer.howstuffworks.com/vpn7.htm

How VPNs Work 8/9

   [61]Encryption is the process of encoding data so that only a computer with the right decoder will be
   able to read and use it. You could use encryption to protect files on your computer or [62]e-mails
   you send to friends or colleagues. An encryption key tells the computer what computations to perform
   on data in order to encrypt or decrypt it. The most common forms of encryption are symmetric-key
   encryption or public-key encryption:
     * In symmetric-key encryption, all computers (or users) share the same key used to both encrypt and
       decrypt a message.
     * In public-key encryption, each computer (or user) has a public-private key pair. One computer
       uses its private key to encrypt a message, and another computer uses the corresponding public key
       to decrypt that message.

   In a VPN, the computers at each end of the tunnel encrypt the data entering the tunnel and decrypt it
   at the other end. However, a VPN needs more than just a pair of keys to apply encryption. That's
   where protocols come in. A site-to-site VPN could use either Internet protocol security protocol
   (IPSec) or generic routing encapsulation (GRE). GRE provides the framework for how to package the
   passenger protocol for transport over the Internet protocol (IP). This framework includes information
   on what type of packet you're encapsulating and the connection between sender and receiver.

   IPSec is a widely used protocol for securing traffic on IP networks, including the Internet. IPSec
   can encrypt data between various devices, including router to router, firewall to router, desktop to
   router, and desktop to server. IPSec consists of two sub-protocols which provide the instructions a
   VPN needs to secure its packets:
     * Encapsulated Security Payload (ESP) encrypts the packet's payload (the data it's transporting)
       with a symmetric key.
     * Authentication Header (AH) uses a hashing operation on the packet header to help hide certain
       packet information (like the sender's identity) until it gets to its destination.

   Networked devices can use IPSec in one of two encryption modes. In transport mode, devices encrypt
   the data traveling between them. In tunnel mode, the devices build a virtual tunnel between two
   networks. As you might guess, VPNs use IPSec in tunnel mode with IPSec ESP and IPSec AH working
   together [source: [67]Friedl].

   In a remote- access VPN, tunneling typically relies on Point-to-point Protocol (PPP) which is part of
   the native protocols used by the Internet. More accurately, though, remote-access VPNs use one of
   three protocols based on PPP:
     * L2F (Layer 2 Forwarding) -- Developed by Cisco; uses any authentication scheme supported by PPP
     * PPTP (Point-to-point Tunneling Protocol) -- Supports 40-bit and 128-bit encryption and any
       authentication scheme supported by PPP
     * L2TP (Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol) -- Combines features of PPTP and L2F and fully supports IPSec;
       also applicable in site-to-site VPNs

   Throughout this article, we've looked at the types of VPNs and the components and protocols that they
   use. Over time, people have developed new and better technologies to use in networks, which improves
   the features of existing VPNs. VPN-specific technologies, though, such as tunneling protocols,
   haven't changed much in that time, perhaps because current VPNs do such a good job at to keep
   businesses connected around the world. Tunnel on to the next page for lots more information about
   virtual private networks.




---
http://computer.howstuffworks.com/vpn8.htm

How VPNs Work 9/9

Related Articles
     * [59]How Routers Work
     * [60]How Firewalls Work
     * [61]How Encryption Works
     * [62]How Network Address Translation Works
     * [63]How OSI Works
     * [64]How LAN Switches Work
     * [65]How Web Servers Work
     * [66]What is a packet?

More Great Links
     * [67]Cisco's Internetworking Technology Handbook
     * [68]Virtual Private Network Consortium

Sources

     * Cisco. "How Virtual Private Networks Work." Oct. 13, 2008. (April 4,
       2011)http://www.cisco.com/application/pdf/paws/14106/how_vpn_works.pdf
     * Friedl, Stephen J. "Steve Friedl's Unixwiz.net Tech Tips: An Illustrated Guide to IPSec." Aug.
       24, 2005. (April 4, 2011)http://www.unixwiz.net/techtips/iguide-ipsec.html
     * Microsoft. "TechNect: VPN Tunneling Protocols." 2011. (April 3,
       2011)http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc771298(WS.10).aspx
     * Pandya, Hiten M. "FreeBSD Handbook: Understanding IPSec." The FreeBSD Documentation Project.
       (April 4, 2011)http://www.freebsd.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook/ipsec.html




---
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_private_network

Virtual private network

This article may need to be rewritten entirely to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards, as it
is predicated on dangerous advice relating to security. You can help. The discussion page may contain
suggestions. (January 2015)

VPN connectivity overview
A virtual private network (VPN) extends a private network across a public network or internet. It
enables users to send and receive data across shared or public networks as if their computing devices
were directly connected to the private network.

VPNs can provide functionality, security and/or network management benefits to the user.[1] But they can
also lead to new issues, and some VPN services, especially "free" ones, can actually violate their users'
privacy by logging their usage and making it available without their consent, or make money by selling
the user's bandwidth to other users.[2]

Some VPNs allow employees to securely access a corporate intranet while located outside the office. Some
can securely connect geographically separated offices of an organization, creating one cohesive
network. Individual Internet users can use some VPNs to secure their wireless transactions, to circumvent
geo-restrictions and censorship, and/or to connect to proxy servers for the purpose of protecting personal
identity and location. But some Internet sites block access via known VPNs to prevent the circumvention
of their geo-restrictions.

A VPN is created by establishing a virtual point-to-point connection through the use of dedicated
connections, virtual tunnelling protocols, or traffic encryption. A VPN available from the public Internet
can provide some of the benefits of a wide area network (WAN). From a user perspective, the resources
available within the private network can be accessed remotely.[3]

Traditional VPNs are characterized by a point-to-point topology, and they do not tend to support or
connect broadcast domains, so services such as Microsoft Windows NetBIOS may not be fully supported or
work as they would on a local area network (LAN). Designers have developed VPN variants, such as Virtual
Private LAN Service (VPLS), and layer-2 tunneling protocols, to overcome this limitation.

Types[edit]
Early data networks allowed VPN-style remote connectivity through dial-up modem or through leased line
connections utilizing Frame Relay and Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) virtual circuits, provisioned
through a network owned and operated by telecommunication carriers. These networks are not considered true
VPNs because they passively secure the data being transmitted by the creation of logical data streams.[4]
They have been replaced by VPNs based on IP and IP/Multi-protocol Label Switching (MPLS) Networks, due
to significant cost-reductions and increased bandwidth[5] provided by new technologies such as Digital
Subscriber Line (DSL)[6] and fiber-optic networks.

VPNs can be either remote-access (connecting a computer to a network) or site-to-site (connecting two
networks). In a corporate setting, remote-access VPNs allow employees to access their company's intranet
from home or while travelling outside the office, and site-to-site VPNs allow employees in geographically
disparate offices to share one cohesive virtual network. A VPN can also be used to interconnect two
similar networks over a dissimilar middle network; for example, two IPv6 networks over an IPv4 network.[7]

VPN systems may be classified by:
The protocols used to tunnel the traffic
The tunnel's termination point location, e.g., on the customer edge or network-provider edge
Whether they offer site-to-site or network-to-network connectivity
The levels of security provided
The OSI layer they present to the connecting network, such as Layer 2 circuits or Layer 3 network
connectivity

Security mechanisms[edit]
VPNs cannot make online connections completely anonymous, but they can usually increase privacy and
security. To prevent disclosure of private information, VPNs typically allow only authenticated remote
access using tunnelling protocols and encryption techniques.

The VPN security model provides:
Confidentiality such that even if the network traffic is sniffed at the packet level (see network sniffer
and Deep packet inspection), an attacker would only see encrypted data
Sender authentication to prevent unauthorized users from accessing the VPN
Message integrity to detect any instances of tampering with transmitted messages
Secure VPN protocols include the following:

Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) as initially developed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
for IPv6, which was required in all standards-compliant implementations of IPv6 before RFC 6434 made
it only a recommendation.[8] This standards-based security protocol is also widely used with IPv4 and
the Layer 2 Tunnelling Protocol. Its design meets most security goals: authentication, integrity, and
confidentiality. IPsec uses encryption, encapsulating an IP packet inside an IPsec packet. De-encapsulation
happens at the end of the tunnel, where the original IP packet is decrypted and forwarded to its intended
destination.
Transport Layer Security (SSL/TLS) can tunnel an entire network's traffic (as it does in the OpenVPN
project and SoftEther VPN project[9]) or secure an individual connection. A number of vendors provide
remote-access VPN capabilities through SSL. An SSL VPN can connect from locations where IPsec runs into
trouble with Network Address Translation and firewall rules.
Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) – used in Cisco AnyConnect VPN and in OpenConnect VPN[10]
to solve the issues SSL/TLS has with tunnelling over UDP.
Microsoft Point-to-Point Encryption (MPPE) works with the Point-to-Point Tunnelling Protocol and in
several compatible implementations on other platforms.
Microsoft Secure Socket Tunnelling Protocol (SSTP) tunnels Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) or Layer 2
Tunnelling Protocol traffic through an SSL 3.0 channel. (SSTP was introduced in Windows Server 2008 and
in Windows Vista Service Pack 1.)
Multi Path Virtual Private Network (MPVPN). Ragula Systems Development Company owns the registered
trademark "MPVPN".[11]
Secure Shell (SSH) VPN – OpenSSH offers VPN tunnelling (distinct from port forwarding) to secure
remote connections to a network or to inter-network links. OpenSSH server provides a limited number of
concurrent tunnels. The VPN feature itself does not support personal authentication.[12][13][14]
Authentication[edit]
Tunnel endpoints must be authenticated before secure VPN tunnels can be established. User-created
remote-access VPNs may use passwords, biometrics, two-factor authentication or other cryptographic
methods. Network-to-network tunnels often use passwords or digital certificates. They permanently store
the key to allow the tunnel to establish automatically, without intervention from the administrator.

Routing[edit]
Tunnelling protocols can operate in a point-to-point network topology that would theoretically not be
considered as a VPN, because a VPN by definition is expected to support arbitrary and changing sets
of network nodes. But since most router implementations support a software-defined tunnel interface,
customer-provisioned VPNs often are simply defined tunnels running conventional routing protocols.

Provider-provisioned VPN building-blocks[edit]
Depending on whether a provider-provisioned VPN (PPVPN)[clarification needed] operates in layer 2 or
layer 3, the building blocks described below may be L2 only, L3 only, or combine them both. Multi-protocol
label switching (MPLS) functionality blurs the L2-L3 identity.[citation needed][original research?]

RFC 4026 generalized the following terms to cover L2 and L3 VPNs, but they were introduced in RFC 2547.[15]
More information on the devices below can also be found in Lewis, Cisco Press.[16]

Customer (C) devices
A device that is within a customer's network and not directly connected to the service provider's
network. C devices are not aware of the VPN.

Customer Edge device (CE)
A device at the edge of the customer's network which provides access to the PPVPN. Sometimes it's just
a demarcation point between provider and customer responsibility. Other providers allow customers to
configure it.

Provider edge device (PE)
A PE is a device, or set of devices, at the edge of the provider network which connects to customer
networks through CE devices and presents the provider's view of the customer site. PEs are aware of the
VPNs that connect through them, and maintain VPN state.

Provider device (P)
A P device operates inside the provider's core network and does not directly interface to any customer
endpoint. It might, for example, provide routing for many provider-operated tunnels that belong to
different customers' PPVPNs. While the P device is a key part of implementing PPVPNs, it is not itself
VPN-aware and does not maintain VPN state. Its principal role is allowing the service provider to scale
its PPVPN offerings, for example, by acting as an aggregation point for multiple PEs. P-to-P connections,
in such a role, often are high-capacity optical links between major locations of providers.

User-visible PPVPN services[edit]
This section deals with the types of VPN considered in the IETF.

OSI Layer 2 services[edit]
Virtual LAN
A Layer 2 technique that allow for the coexistence of multiple LAN broadcast domains, interconnected via
trunks using the IEEE 802.1Q trunking protocol. Other trunking protocols have been used but have become
obsolete, including Inter-Switch Link (ISL), IEEE 802.10 (originally a security protocol but a subset
was introduced for trunking), and ATM LAN Emulation (LANE).

Virtual private LAN service (VPLS)
Developed by IEEE, VLANs allow multiple tagged LANs to share common trunking. VLANs frequently comprise only
customer-owned facilities. Whereas VPLS as described in the above section (OSI Layer 1 services) supports
emulation of both point-to-point and point-to-multipoint topologies, the method discussed here extends
Layer 2 technologies such as 802.1d and 802.1q LAN trunking to run over transports such as Metro Ethernet.

As used in this context, a VPLS is a Layer 2 PPVPN, rather than a private line, emulating the full
functionality of a traditional local area network (LAN). From a user standpoint, a VPLS makes it possible
to interconnect several LAN segments over a packet-switched, or optical, provider core; a core transparent
to the user, making the remote LAN segments behave as one single LAN.[17]

In a VPLS, the provider network emulates a learning bridge, which optionally may include VLAN service.

Pseudo wire (PW)
PW is similar to VPLS, but it can provide different L2 protocols at both ends. Typically, its interface
is a WAN protocol such as Asynchronous Transfer Mode or Frame Relay. In contrast, when aiming to provide
the appearance of a LAN contiguous between two or more locations, the Virtual Private LAN service or
IPLS would be appropriate.

Ethernet over IP tunneling
EtherIP (RFC 3378) is an Ethernet over IP tunnelling protocol specification. EtherIP has only packet
encapsulation mechanism. It has no confidentiality nor message integrity protection. EtherIP was introduced
in the FreeBSD network stack[18] and the SoftEther VPN[19] server program.

IP-only LAN-like service (IPLS)
A subset of VPLS, the CE devices must have L3 capabilities; the IPLS presents packets rather than
frames. It may support IPv4 or IPv6.

OSI Layer 3 PPVPN architectures[edit]
This section discusses the main architectures for PPVPNs, one where the PE disambiguates duplicate
addresses in a single routing instance, and the other, virtual router, in which the PE contains a virtual
router instance per VPN. The former approach, and its variants, have gained the most attention.

One of the challenges of PPVPNs involves different customers using the same address space, especially
the IPv4 private address space.[20] The provider must be able to disambiguate overlapping addresses in
the multiple customers' PPVPNs.

BGP/MPLS PPVPN
In the method defined by RFC 2547, BGP extensions advertise routes in the IPv4 VPN address family,
which are of the form of 12-byte strings, beginning with an 8-byte Route Distinguisher (RD) and ending
with a 4-byte IPv4 address. RDs disambiguate otherwise duplicate addresses in the same PE.

PEs understand the topology of each VPN, which are interconnected with MPLS tunnels, either directly or
via P routers. In MPLS terminology, the P routers are Label Switch Routers without awareness of VPNs.

Virtual router PPVPN
The Virtual Router architecture,[21][22] as opposed to BGP/MPLS techniques, requires no modification to
existing routing protocols such as BGP. By the provisioning of logically independent routing domains,
the customer operating a VPN is completely responsible for the address space. In the various MPLS tunnels,
the different PPVPNs are disambiguated by their label, but do not need routing distinguishers.

Unencrypted tunnels[edit]
Main article: Tunneling protocol
Some virtual networks may not use encryption to protect the privacy of data. While VPNs often provide
security, an unencrypted overlay network does not neatly fit within the secure or trusted categorization. For
example, a tunnel set up between two hosts that used Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) would in fact
be a virtual private network, but neither secure nor trusted.

Native plaintext tunnelling protocols include Layer 2 Tunnelling Protocol (L2TP) when it is set up
without IPsec and Point-to-Point Tunnelling Protocol (PPTP) or Microsoft Point-to-Point Encryption (MPPE).

Trusted delivery networks[edit]
Trusted VPNs do not use cryptographic tunnelling, and instead rely on the security of a single provider's
network to protect the traffic.[23]

Multi-Protocol Label Switching (MPLS) often overlays VPNs, often with quality-of-service control over
a trusted delivery network.
Layer 2 Tunnelling Protocol (L2TP)[24] which is a standards-based replacement, and a compromise taking
the good features from each, for two proprietary VPN protocols: Cisco's Layer 2 Forwarding (L2F)[25]
(obsolete as of 2009) and Microsoft's Point-to-Point Tunnelling Protocol (PPTP).[26][27]
From the security standpoint, VPNs either trust the underlying delivery network, or must enforce security
with mechanisms in the VPN itself. Unless the trusted delivery network runs among physically secure sites
only, both trusted and secure models need an authentication mechanism for users to gain access to the VPN.

VPNs in mobile environments[edit]
Mobile virtual private networks are used in settings where an endpoint of the VPN is not fixed to a
single IP address, but instead roams across various networks such as data networks from cellular carriers
or between multiple Wi-Fi access points.[28] Mobile VPNs have been widely used in public safety, where
they give law enforcement officers access to mission-critical applications, such as computer-assisted
dispatch and criminal databases, while they travel between different subnets of a mobile network.[29]
They are also used in field service management and by healthcare organizations,[30] among other industries.

Increasingly, mobile VPNs are being adopted by mobile professionals who need reliable connections.[30]
They are used for roaming seamlessly across networks and in and out of wireless coverage areas without
losing application sessions or dropping the secure VPN session. A conventional VPN can not withstand
such events because the network tunnel is disrupted, causing applications to disconnect, time out,[28]
or fail, or even cause the computing device itself to crash.[30]

Instead of logically tying the endpoint of the network tunnel to the physical IP address, each tunnel is
bound to a permanently associated IP address at the device. The mobile VPN software handles the necessary
network authentication and maintains the network sessions in a manner transparent to the application and
the user.[28] The Host Identity Protocol (HIP), under study by the Internet Engineering Task Force, is
designed to support mobility of hosts by separating the role of IP addresses for host identification from
their locator functionality in an IP network. With HIP a mobile host maintains its logical connections
established via the host identity identifier while associating with different IP addresses when roaming
between access networks.

VPN on routers[edit]
With the increasing use of VPNs, many have started deploying VPN connectivity on routers for additional
security and encryption of data transmission by using various cryptographic techniques.[31] Setting up
VPN services on a router allows any connected device to use the VPN network while it is enabled. This also
creates VPN services on devices that do not have native VPN clients such as smart-TVs, gaming consoles etc.

Many router manufacturers, such as Cisco, Linksys, Asus, and Netgear supply their routers with built-in
VPN clients.

	This section may be confusing or unclear to readers. (September 2015)
Since these routers do not support all the major VPN protocols, such as OpenVPN.

Limitations: Not every router compatible with open source firmware which depends on the built-in
flash memory and processor. Firmwares like DD-WRT require a minimum of 2 MiB flash memory and Broadcom
chipsets. Setting up VPN services on a router requires a deeper knowledge of network security and careful
installation. Minor misconfiguration of VPN connections can leave the network vulnerable. Performance
will vary depending on the ISP and their reliability.[32][33]

Networking limitations[edit]
One major limitation of traditional VPNs is that they are point-to-point, and do not tend to support
or connect broadcast domains. Therefore, communication, software, and networking, which are based on
layer 2 and broadcast packets, such as NetBIOS used in Windows networking, may not be fully supported or
work exactly as they would on a real LAN. Variants on VPN, such as Virtual Private LAN Service (VPLS),
and layer 2 tunneling protocols, are designed to overcome this limitation.
