filename: vpns-for-beginners_20160622.txt
https://www.bestvpn.com/blog/38176/vpns-for-beginners/

VPNs for Beginners ¢ What you need to know

Douglas Crawford Douglas Crawford
January 22,2016.

What is VPN?

Virtual Private Networking (VPN) is a suite of technologies that:
- Provide privacy by hiding your internet activity from your ISP (and government)
- Allow you to evade censorship (by school, work, your ISP, or government)
- Allow you to ōgeo-spoofö your location in order to access services unfairly denied to you based on your
	geographical location (or when you are on holiday)
- Protect you against hackers when using a public WiFi hotspot
- Allow you to P2P download in safety.

In order to use VPN you must first signup for a VPN service, which typically cost between $5 ¢ $10 a month
(with reductions for buying 6 months or a year at a time). A contract with a VPN service is required to
use VPN.

Note that using a VPN service does not replace the need for an Internet Service Provider, as it is your
ISP that provides your internet connection in the first place.

A note on commercial vs. corporate VPN
VPN technology was originally developed to allow remote workers to securely connect to corporate networks
in order to access corporate resources when away from the office. Although VPN is still used in this
way, the term now usually refers to commercial VPN services that allow customers to access the internet
privately through their servers.

This article (and the BestVPN website) deals exclusively with these commercial VPN services, and use of
the term VPN here should not be confused with private corporate networks, which are an entirely different
kettle of fish (despite similarities, and crossovers in the underlying technology.)

How does it work?
Normally, when you connect to the internet you first connect to your Internet
Service Provider (ISP), which then connects you to any websites (or other internet resources) that you
wish to visit. All your internet traffic passes through your ISPÆs servers, and can be viewed by your ISP.

When using VPN you connect to a server run by your VPN provider (a ōVPN serverö) via an encrypted
connection (sometimes referred to as a ōVPN tunnelö).  This means that all data traveling between your
computer and the VPN server is encrypted so that only you and the VPN server can ōseeö it.

This setup has a number of important consequences:
1. Your ISP cannot know what you get up to on the internet
It cannot see your data because it is encrypted
It cannot know which websites (etc.) you visit because all internet activity is routed through the VPN
server. Your ISP can only see that you are connected to the VPN server.
Your ISP can only see that you are connected to the VPN server.

2. You appear to access the internet from the IP address of the VPN server
If the VPN server is located in a different country to you, then as far as the internet is concerned
you are located in that country (most VPN services run servers located in many different countries).
Anyone monitoring your internet activity from the internet will only be able to trace it back to the VPN
server, so unless the VPN provider hands over your details (more on this later), your real IP address
is hidden. This means that websites etc. cannot see your true IP address (just that of the server).
3. It is safe to use public WiFi hotspots because the internet connection between your device and the
VPN server is encrypted. Even if a hacker somehow manages to intercept your data, for example by tricking
you into connecting to an ōevil twinö hotspot or packet-sniffing your WiFi data, the data is safe because
it is encrypted.

[Tweet ōA VPN keeps your data safe from hackers when using public WiFi hotspots- bestvpn.com/?p=38176ö]

4. Your VPN provider can know what you get up to on the internet
You are therefore shifting trust away from your ISP (which has no interest in, or commitment to,
protecting your privacy) to your VPN provider who usually promises to protect your privacy.
More privacy-minded VPN services mitigate this issue by employing various technical measures to know as
little as they can about you. More on this later.

5. Your internet will slow down somewhat because:
Encrypting and decrypting data requires processing power. This also means that, technically, the stronger
the encryption used, the slower your internet access. However, given the power of modern computers,
this issue is relatively minor compared toģ
The extra distance traveled by your data. Using VPN always introduces another leg to the journey that
your data has to travel (i.e. to the VPN server), and thanks to the laws of physics, the further your
data has to travel, the longer it takes.
If you connect to VPN server located geographically nearby in order to access a website also located
nearby, then you can expect around a 10 percent hit to the internet speed you get without using VPN. If
you connect to a server half way across the planet, you should expect a much greater hit.

It is also a case that some VPN providers do better than others when it comes to speed performance, which is
why every review we publish includes detailed speed tests This is due to factors such as  server processing
power, available bandwidth, and load (how many other people are using the server at the same time as you).

All other things being equal, for best performance when using VPN you should connect to the VPN server
closest website or service you wish to use, and then as close as possible to your own location.

For example, if I want to access US Netflix from the UK I would connect to a server located in the US,
but as close as possible to the UK (somewhere on the northern East Coast, such a New York, would be ideal).

Is it legal?
Yes. In most countries citizens have a legal right to privacy, and as far as I know simply using a VPN
service is  illegal  pretty much nowhere.

More repressive countries such as China and Iran, who understandably do not like the unrestricted and
largely unaccountable access to the internet that VPN allows,do ban VPN services from operating in their
country, and attempt to block users from accessing overseas VPN services.

Even in China,	however, which has the most sophisticated internet censorship system in the world, such
blocks are only partially successful (and we have yet to hear of anybody getting into trouble just for
using VPN).

In Europe the threat of terrorism has been seized on by a number governments to introduce wide-ranging
surveillance laws, and in many countries (such as France and the UK) VPN providers are required to keep
logs of usersÆ activity. VPN users looking for privacy should therefore avoid any services based in such
countries, and use servers located in countries where logs are not legally required.

[Tweet ōAvoid VPN services based in surveillance countries if you care about privacy ¢ bestvpn.com/?p=38176ö]

Where do I start?
There are now a huge number of VPN services vying for your attention, and unfortunately not all VPN
providers are not created equal (far from it!) The first thing you should do, therefore, is check out
reviews and recommendations on sites such as BestVPN (hey, itÆs what weÆre here for!).

Probably the first thing to consider what you mainly want a VPN for. Is it for privacy while surfing the
internet? To download without looking over your shoulder? To evade the Great Firewall of China? Or just
to access geo-blocked  TV streaming services from abroad?

Although pretty near all VPN services cover the main basis to some extent, there is no such thing as a
perfect VPN service. Things you should be looking out for include:

Price (of course!)
Speed  ¢ VPN always entails some internet speed loss due to extra distances traveled and the processing
demands of encryption/decryption (as discussed earlier).
Privacy ¢ all VPN providers promise privacy, but what does this actually mean? See ōDoes a VPN make me
anonymous?ö below for a discussion on this
Security ¢ how good are technical measures used to prevent an adversary (hackers, the NSA, etc.) forcing
access to your data. Again, see below for more details.
Number of servers/countries ¢ If you need to connect to servers located all over the place, then the
more the better, and the more likely it is that a server will be located where you want it to be.
Number of simultaneous connections ¢ Some providers will only let you connect one device to their service
at a time, while others allow you connect your PC, laptop, phone, Xbox and girl/boyfriendÆs tablet all
at once. The more the merrier!
Customer support ¢ Many VPN users are still learning the ropes, so customer support that a) actually
answers your questions in a reasonable timeframe, and b) knows what it is talking about, can be invaluable.
Free trials and money back guarantees: Perhaps the best way to decide if a service is for you is to try
before you buy!
Software ¢ VPN clients should not only look good good and be easy to use, but can add lots of funky
features. The most useful of these are VPN kill switchesand DNS leak protection
Cross-platform support ¢ a service is no use if it canÆt run on your device/OS. Support can include
detailed setup guides for different platforms, or dedicated apps (as is increasingly common for iOS and
Android devices).
Other bells and whistles ¢ Some providers offer ōstealth serversö for evading the Great Firewall of China,
free SmartDNS or cloud storage, fancy security options (such as VPN through Tor), and more.
VPN is available for almost all computer-type devices, including desktops, laptops, smart phones,
and tablets.

Just about every provider fully supports Windows, Mac OSX, Android and iOS platforms, and many also
support Linux and Chrome OS (if only indirectly). Support for Blackberry OS and Windows Mobile devices,
however, is much patchier.

To signup for a VPN service, simply visit its website and follow the links. Your provider will give
give you instructions on what to do next, or our full reviews all have a ōThe processö section that runs
through the whole process for each provider.

Interestingly, there does not appear to be much correlation between what you pay for VPN and the service
you receive, so I again suggest that you read our reviews (including readers comments sections) and take
advantage of any free trials and money-back  guarantees to help you decide.

Free VPN
Free VPN services do exist, but these are almost severely limited in some
way, orcannot be trusted not to just sell your data. Running a VPN service is not cheap, so you have to
ask yourself how a free service can afford to operate. As the old saying goes, if you donÆt pay for a
product, then you are the productģ

[Tweet ōMake sure your free VPN isnÆt selling your data ¢ bestvpn.com/?p=38176 @bestVPN_comö]

That said, some reputable free VPN services do exist, most notably CyberGhostÆs free offering, which
while limited, is be enough for many casual users, and is transparently funded through its premium
offerings. VPN Gate is another option, and is run by volunteers.

You should be aware, however, that no free VPN will give you anywhere near the performance or privacy
benefits of a good commercial service.

Given that VPN typically costs the price of a beer or so per month, I strongly recommend splashing out
on a fully featured service.

Does a VPN make me anonymous?
No. VPN does not make you anonymous because the VPN provider can always* know
who you are, and can see what you get up to on the internet. Privacy-oriented VPN services go to great
lengths, however, to protect their customersÆ privacy, which is why we say that VPN provides privacy
(rather than anonymity).

[Tweet ōVPN providers can always know who you are and what you do on the internet ¢ bestvpn.com/?p=38176
@BestVPN_com ō]

Empty promises
The first thing to note is that while many providers promise to protect usersÆ privacy, such promises
are not worth the digital ink they are printed on if they keep logs. No matter what they say, no VPN
provider staff will go to jail (or ruin their business) to protect a customer. If the data exists,
any VPN provider can be compelled to hand it over. Period.

Trust
If you want to use VPN to provide privacy, then only a æōno logsö provider will do. Unfortunately,
when a provider claims to keep no logs, we just have to take its word for it (which is why the Edward
SnowdenÆs of this world prefer to use Tor).

Choosing a VPN provider therefore comes down to a matter of trust, so how do you know a provider can be
trusted? Wellģ privacy orientated VPN providers have built their business model on promising privacy, and
if it becomes known that they failed to do this (for example by keeping logs even when they promised not
to, and then being compelled to hand these over to the authorities), their businesses would be worthless
(and they might find themselves liable for legal action by the compromised individual).

Real-time tracking
It should be understood that even when a provider keeps no logs, it can and will be able to monitor
usersÆ internet activity in real-time (this is essential for trouble shooting etc. ¢ all the more so
when no logs are kept).

Most no logs providers also promise not to monitor usersÆ activity in real-time (unless necessary for
technical reasons), but most countries can legally demand that a provider start to keeps logs of an
individual (and provide a gag order to prevent the company alerting their customer of this).

This is, however, a specifically targeted demand or request (most providers will happily cooperate when
it comes to catching pedophiles, for example), so only specific individuals already identified by the
authorities need be too concerned.

Shared IPs
In addition to keeping no logs, any company that cares about protecting their usersÆ privacy also
uses shared IPs. This means that many users are assigned the same IP address, so matching identified
internet behavior with a specific individual is very difficult to do, even if a provider should wish
(or is compelled) to do so. This goes a long way towards addressing the privacy issue outlined above.

What does æno logsÆ actually mean? Usage logs vs. connection logs

When many providers claim to keep no logs, what they really mean is that they keep no (what we term)
æusage logsÆ. They do however keep æconnection logsÆ:

Usage logs ¢ details of what you get up to on the internet, such as which web sites you visit etc. These
are the most important (and potentially damaging logs)
Connection logs ¢ many æno logsÆ providers keep metadata about usersÆ connections, but not usage
logs. Exactly what is logged varies by provider, but typically includes things like when you connected,
how long for, how often etc. Providers usually justify this as necessary for dealing with technical
issues and instances of abuse. In general we are not too bothered by this level log keeping, but the
truly paranoid should be aware that, at least in theory, such logs could be used to identify an individual
with known internet behavior through an æend to end timing attackÆ
Some providers claim to keep no logs of any kind (ōno logs providersö, and it is these that are generally
considered best for protecting privacy. It should be noted that some critics argue it is impossible to
run a VPN service without keeping logs, and those who claim to do so are being disingenuous.

However, as mentioned above, with a VPN provider everything comes down to trust, and if a provider claims
to keep no logs at all we have to trust its ability to run to run the service in this wayģ

Mandatory data retention
Something to be aware of when choosing a privacy-friendly VPN provider is where it is based (i.e. under
which countryÆs laws does it operate). Many countries (including many European countries) require
communications companies to keep logs for a certain amount of time, although whether these laws apply to
VPN providers can vary somewhat (in Europe the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Romania, and Sweden are popular
places to base a VPN service because VPN providers in these countries are not required to keep logs).

If a VPN provider is based in a country which really requires it to keep logs then it will do so, no
matter what other impression it tries to give.

Paying for VPN anonymously
More privacy-minded VPN companies allow you pay for their services anonymously. The most common method
is using Bitcoins**, but companies such as Private Internet Access will accept anonymously purchased
store cards, and Mullvad will even take cash sent by post!

This adds an extra layer of privacy, as the VPN company does not know your real name, address, or banking
details. It will, however, still know your real IP address*

In addition to the direct privacy benefits of paying anonymously, accepting anonymous payment is often a
good indicator that a VPN takes privacy seriously (this is hardly a guarantee, but not accepting anonymous
payment is definitely poor show!)

** Paying by Bitcoin is not inherently anonymous, but if the correct steps are taken then a high degree
of anonymity can be achieved. Please see my guide to Buying Bitcoins to pay for VPN anonymously for
more details.

An exception to the rule*
An exception to the rule that VPN providers always know who you are is if you use VPN through Tor. This
means that you connect to the VPN service via the Tor anonymity network, so that your VPN provider cannot
see your true IP address.

If you also signup using Tor, and use an anonymous payment method,you can achieve very high level of
true anonymity with this setup. Do be aware, however, that doing this combines the speed hit of both
VPN and Tor, making internet connections very slow.

At the time of writing, only AirVPN and BolehVPN support VPN through Tor (as far as I am aware). For
more details please checkout my article on Using VPN and Tor together.

[Tweet ōUse a VPN+@torproject+@Bitcoin for a high level of anonymity ¢ bestvpn.com/?p=38176 @bestVPN_comö]

Soģ am I ōsafeö if I use VPN?
Using a good no logs VPN service does provide a high degree of privacy. It will protect you from blanket
government surveillance, prevent your ISP knowing what you get up to on the internet, prevent you being
tracked by copyright owners when pirating stuff, and will even provide a fair bit of protection when
engaged in low level criminal activities.

It will not, however, protect you if the police, your government, or the NSA, are specifically interested
in you, and are willing to spend time and resources investigating  what you do on the internet.

Journalists, whistleblowers, and others who need a very high level of anonymity should therefore use
Tor instead (although VPN through Tor does provide some concrete benefits).

How secure am I?

Encryption
VPN protects your data using encryption. I have two core articles discussing VPN encryption and the
various terms used to describe it. They are rather technical for this beginners guide, but if the subject
interests you then please do check them out:

PPTP vs L2TP vs OpenVPN vs SSTP vs IKEv2, and
VPN encryption terms explained (AES vs RSA vs SHA etc.)
The TL:DR version, however, is to use OpenVPN (or maybe IKEv2) wherever possible. L2TP/IPsec is fine,
but PPTP should be avoided at all costs (in my view it is irresponsible for a provider to even offer
customers PPTP as an option!).

As a point of reference, the minimum default settings for the OpenVPN protocol are:

Handshake: RSA-2048
Hash authentication:  SHA-1
Cipher: Blowfish-128

This is more than sufficient for most users, but if you are the sort of person who worries about the NSA,
then my minimum recommendation for a ōsecureö VPN connection that should be resistant against any known
form of attack for the foreseeable future is:

VPN Protocol: OpenVPN with Perfect Forward Secrecy enabled
Handshake: RSA-2048
Hash authentication: SHA256
Cipher: AES-256

IP leaks & kill switches
If your VPN is working properly then it should completely hide your IP address from any website you
visit. Unfortunately, for a variety of reasons, this is not always the case. If a website can somehow
detect your true IP address even when using VPN, you have what is known as an IP leak.

To determine if you are suffering an IP leak, visit ipleak.net. If you are connected to a VPN and you can
see your true IP address (or even just your ISPÆs name) anywhere on this page then you have an IP leak.
Note that ipleak.net does not detect IPv6 leaks, so to test for these you should visit test-ipv6.com.

If you detect a leak please consult A Complete Guide to IP Leaks in order to find out why its happening,
and how to fix it.

A related issue is VPN dropouts, as every VPN connection will occasionally fail. With a good VPN provider
this should not happen very often, but it occasionally happens even to the best. If your computer
continues to remain connected to the internet after a dropout,, then your real IP will be exposed.

The solution is a ōVPN kill switchö which either monitors your internet connection and shuts it down when
it detects a VPN dropout, or uses firewall rules to prevent any internet traffic leaving your computer
outside of your VPN connection.

[Tweet ōA VPN kill switch monitors your internet connection and shuts it down if your VPN fails ¢
bestvpn.com/?p=38176 @BestVPN_comö]

Many VPN providers include a kill switch as part of their VPN software, but third party options are
available. Alternatively, if feeling brave you can configure your own using firewall rules. Please see
here for more discussion on kill switches, including how to configure OpenVPN for Android as a kill switch.

Can I torrent safely using VPN?
Yes, as long as you use a provider that permits it (not all do, so check!) With
VPN your data is encrypted so that your ISP cannot see what you are doing online, and your IP is shielded
by your VPN provider.

When P2P downloading via BitTorrent (or streaming using Popcorn Time) everyone else downloading the same
file can easily see the IP address of everyone else who is downloading that file (hence the names P2P
and filesharing!) When using a VPN, someone tracking that file will only see the IP of your VPN server,
not your real IP address.

VPN companies get bombarded with DMCA-style copyright infringement notices due to usersÆ activities all
the time. Some prefer to cooperate with copyright holders, to the point of handing over the names of
infringing customers for further legal action, while others simply try to keep copyright holders happy
by issuing warnings, and ultimately disconnecting repeat offenders.

Some providers, however, are happy to let customers P2P download, and make a good business out of
protecting their identities (keeping no logs is always a good start here!) If your VPN provider allows
P2P then you can download in safely.

Perhaps more than anyone, however, downloaders should be careful to use a VPN kill switch as they often
leave torrents to download unattended for hours at timeģ

When SmartDNS is better
Many people use VPN primarily to evade geo-restrictions in order to watch TV
streaming services that are blocked to international users (or which offer better catalogs to users in
certain countries).

If this is the only reason you want VPN for, and you are not interested in the privacy and security
advantages that VPN brings, then you may be better off using a SmartDNS service instead.

SmartDNS uses much simpler technology and does not encrypt your connection, which makes it faster than VPN
(so fewer buffering issues, but distance remains an issue).  It can also be configured on many internet
devices that cannot run a VPN client, such as Smart TVÆs, media streaming devices, and games consoles
(as every internet capable device has DNS settings that can be changed).

SmartDNS services are also usually cheaper than VPN ones. For more information please visit our sister-site
SmartDNS.com.

Does VPN work on mobile devices?

Yes, butģ

VPN is well-supported on the iOS and Android platforms, and as with desktop computers will encrypt
you data and hide your IP address for all internet connections. When accessing websites through your
websiteÆs browser for P2P downloading, therefore, you are fully protected when using a VPN.

Howeverģ mobile apps have many ways other than your IP address to determine your identity, and know what
you are doing online. Apps often have access to GPS data, contact lists, Google Play/Apple Store ID,
and more. Many apps send this and all sorts of other personal data directly to their parent companies
(thereby bypassing your VPN).

As if this wasnÆt bad enough, the ads used in many apps as a way for developers to monetize their product
are whole privacy nightmare just by themselves!

To gain the full benefits of VPN on a mobile device you should therefore access websites and services
via  their web page or web interface using your browser (preferably the open source and privacy-friendly
Firefox), rather than through dedicated apps.

Please always be aware, however, that smartphones (even more than WiFi-only tablets) are inherently
insecure, and there is very little you can really do to make them secure.

What VPN does not do
Using VPN does meaningfully improve your privacy and security, but it is important to understand what
it will not help with:

VPN does not provide anonymity ¢ as already discussed. If the NSA is after you, VPN will not help,
and we consider any VPN provider that says VPN will make you ōanonymousö  (as many do) to be highly
irresponsible.
VPN does not prevent tracking by websites ¢ hiding your IP address with VPN helps a bit, but most tracking
performed by websites and by marketing & analytics companies is performed using tracking technologies
such as cookies and worse (including browser fingerprinting), which VPN will not help with. The best
defense against this form of tracking is to use various browser add-ons andtweaks.

Conclusion
VPN is a very versatile tool, and one that for a few bucks a month will greatly enhance your internet
experience, decrease your chances of being hacked, and prevent your government from watching everything
you do online (this last point is why I personally use VPN religiously).

My hope with this guide is that you will now be able to make  informed choices about which VPN service
is right for you. If any terms here still confuse you, we have a Glossary designed to help.


---
