filename: vpn-open-wifi-exposes-users_20160622.txt
http://arstechnica.com/security/2015/06/even-with-a-vpn-open-wi-fi-exposes-users/

Even with a VPN, open Wi-Fi exposes users

Those moments between Wi-Fi connect and VPN launch can give away a lot.

   by Larry Seltzer - Jun 12, 2015 1:15 pm UTC

   At the local cafe, hackers can get a cup of coffee and rogue access to the network. Who needs a VPN;
   what could go wrong?

   Larry Seltzer is the former editorial director of BYTE, Dark Reading, and Network Computing at UBM
   Tech and has spent over a decade consulting and writing on technology subjects, primarily in the area
   of security. Larry began his career as a Software Engineer at the now-defunct Desktop Software
   Corporation in Princeton, New Jersey, on the team that wrote the NPL 4GL query language.

   By now, any sentient IT person knows the perils of open Wi-Fi. Those free connections in cafes and
   hotels don't encrypt network traffic, so others on the network can read your traffic and possibly
   hijack your sessions. But one of the main solutions to this problem has a hole in it that isn't
   widely appreciated.

   Large sites like Twitter and Google have adopted SSL broadly in order to protect users on such
   networks. But for broader protection, many people use a virtual private network (VPN). Most people,
   if they use a VPN at all, use a corporate one. But there are public services as well, such
   as [30]F-Secure's Freedome and [31]Privax's HideMyAss. Your device connects with the VPN service's
   servers and establishes an encrypted tunnel for all your Internet traffic from the device to their
   servers. The service then proxies all your traffic to and from its destination.

   It's a better solution than relying on SSL from websites for a number of reasons: with a VPN, all of
   the traffic from your device is encrypted, whether the site you are visiting has SSL or not. Even if
   the Wi-Fi access point to which you are connected is malicious, it can't see the traffic. Any party
   that is in a position to monitor your traffic can't even see the addresses and URLs of the sites with
   which you are communicating, something they can do with SSL over open Wi-Fi.

   But there is a hole in this protection, and it happens at connect time. The VPN cannot connect until
   you connect to the Internet, but the VPN connection is not instantaneous. In many, perhaps most
   public Wi-Fi sites, your Wi-Fi hardware may connect automatically to the network, but you must open a
   browser to a "captive portal," which comes from the local router, and attempt to gain access to the
   Internet beyond. You may have to manually accept a TOS (Terms of Service) agreement first.

   In this period before your VPN takes over, what might be exposed depends on what software you run. Do
   you use a POP3 or IMAP e-mail client? If they check automatically, that traffic is out in the clear
   for all to see, including potentially the login credentials. Other programs, like instant messaging
   client, may try to log on.

   I tested this scenario at a Starbucks with Google Wi-Fi while running Wireshark. Thousands of packets
   went back and forth on the open network before the VPN attempted to connect. A quick scan of the list
   found nothing that looked dangerous, and in fact the software on my system used TLS 1.2 in almost all
   cases, which was quite a relief. But your configuration may be different from mine, and even if your
   software attempts to use HTTPS, it could be vulnerable to attacks like [32]SSLStrip, which tricks the
   software into using open HTTP anyway.

   This gap in coverage may only be a matter of seconds, but that's enough to expose valuable
   information like logon credentials. Try running a network monitoring tool like [33]Microsoft's
   TCPView for Windows or [34]Little Snitch for Mac before you establish your Internet connection and
   see what happens in those first few seconds. The information may be protected by encryption, but it
   can carry details about your system configuration that could be used to identify it—or provide clues
   for an attacker.
   [35][beforevpnconnect-640x244.png]
   [36]Enlarge / Just a fraction of the traffic that went out over a Wi-Fi network at Starbuck's in the
   moments between connection and VPN startup. Luckily, most of this was encrypted.
   Larry Seltzer

   Even beyond this time gap, sometimes VPN connections go down. At least in the default configurations
   of most operating systems, the applications on the system will fail over to the open Wi-Fi
   connection. Don't blame just the public VPN vendors. The same problem is true of corporate VPNs,
   unless they go to the trouble of configuring the system around the problem.

   So, how do you do that? Shaun Murphy, a founder of PrivateGiant (www.privategiant.com), which makes
   products to protect the security and privacy of online communications, suggests that you do it with a
   software firewall, either one that comes with your operating system or a third-party one:

     The basic approach is to prevent all inbound and outbound connections on your public networks (or
     zones) with the exception of a browser that you use to connect to captive portals and such. That
     browser should be one you only use for this purpose and, perhaps, some lightweight browsing
     (certainly not email, social, or any other personally identifiable purpose.) Using that same
     firewall, set up a profile/zone for VPN traffic where inbound / outbound traffic are less
     restricted (I recommend blocking outbound connections by default and then adding in programs as
     needed, it's surprising how many programs call home... all the time.) The nice thing about this
     approach is your email client, primary web browser, and other applications you use will be useless
     unless you are actively connected to the VPN.

   Sean Sullivan, security advisor at F-Secure, gave us the same advice with the useful addition that
   "...you'd want to launch the browser [for the captive portal] in 'safe mode' so the plugins are
   disabled." If you're a Firefox or Google Chrome user, then Internet Explorer and Safari should fit
   the bill. You've got them on the system anyway.

   Configuring firewall software on your PC to block non-VPN traffic isn't all that easy. It varies
   across operating systems and products, and it may not even be possible in Windows 8.1. On Windows,
   here's a summary of what you'd need to do:
     * Connect to the VPN of your choice using the normal procedure for that product.
     * In the Network and Sharing Center in Control Panel, make sure the VPN connection is set as a
       Public network, and the home or public Wi-Fi network is set as Home or Office (Home is better).
       (In Windows 8 and later this can be problematic unless the network connection is brand new,
       because Windows 8.x provides no user interface with which to change the location type—so the
       whole exercise may be impossible—unless you first delete and recreate all your network
       connections.)
     * Finally, in the Windows Firewall in Control Panel go to the Advanced Settings. Create a rule to
       block all programs from connecting on Public networks. Then create a rule to allow both the VPN
       program and the browser you want to use for the captive portal to be allowed to connect on Public
       networks. You will need to set these rules both for inbound and outbound connections.

   BolehVPN of Hong Kong has produced a more detailed set of [37]instructions for using the Windows
   Firewall in Windows 7. On a Mac, you can achieve the same results with [38]the aforementioned Little
   Snitch firewall. And Douglas Crawford at BestVPN.com has[39] instructions for the Comodo Firewall on
   Windows, but says that he couldn't get the procedure to work on the standard Windows Firewall in
   Windows 8.1.

   All in all, it's a fair amount of trouble to go through, and it's a configuration you'd only want on
   open Wi-Fi. If you work where there is secure WPA2 encryption on the Wi-Fi, then the VPN is probably
   not worth the overhead and the reduced network performance.

   The real solution to this problem isn't hacking with firewalls, it's providing encryption by default
   in public Wi-Fi. This isn't done much now because that would mean supplying passwords, and the
   support overhead would just be too great for a cafe. The result is that we have an insecure situation
   with bad, but adequate, usability.

   The Wi-Fi Alliance has had a solution for this problem nearly in place for years,
   called [40]Passpoint. The Passpoint protocol was created to allow for Wi-Fi "roaming" by creating a
   way for access points to grant access by way of a third-party credential, such as your Google ID or
   your ISP account. When you connect to a public access point through Passpoint, it authenticates you
   and establishes a secure connection using WPA2-Enterprise, the gold standard in Wi-Fi
   security—instead of leaving your traffic unencrypted or visible on the shared wireless LAN.

   The reason that you don't yet see Passpoint everywhere is that it requires the Wi-Fi provider—such as
   a consumer ISP,  Google, or Boingo—to trust certain authentication providers and to advertise a list
   of them to connecting devices—the longer, the better. And users would need to configure Passpoint on
   their system to use one or more of their credentials when connecting to such a network. There hasn't
   been wide adoption of Passpoint yet—while it's been put to use in certain high-volume locations, such
   as many airports, it's still pretty uncommon.

   The Wi-Fi Alliance now says that Passpoint is gaining traction in the enterprise [41]as a way to
   handle BYOD. That's interesting if true, but it doesn't address the pain point of public Wi-Fi
   privacy. Passpoint has the potential to close the VPN data leakage window and make public Internet
   services far more secure. In its absence, there is no good solution.
