filename: which-is-faster-stack-or-heap-allocation_20210803.txt_20210803.txt
https://www.quora.com/Which-is-faster-stack-allocation-or-heap-allocation/answer/Emanuel-Falkenauer

Which is faster, stack allocation or heap allocation?
December 6, 2020

Originally Answered: Is stack memory faster than heap?

I'm really stunned to see that all the other (so far 4) answers are totally wrong by omission: they muse
about memory caching and such... but do not even mention the real huge elephant in the room, namely the
memory manager and the heap allocator!

The right answer is: stack is catastrophically faster than heap! Here's why:

When you allocate a new memory block on the heap (with malloc/calloc/realloc or new in C/C++), here is
what really happens:

1 - The OS kernel is asked whether it actually has that space available (yep: you have to ask the OS,
    a huge expense!!).... for all programs it runs at that moment. Why? Because you can easily ask for
    a block of 32Gigs (in a 64bit OS) even if your machine only has 8Gigs of physical RAM!

2 - If the answer is yes, then the OS needs to reserve that block in the RAM for you... but that may
    take a very long time if your machine is heavily loaded, as it may involve virtual memory - in which case
     -  The OS must go over all the RAM used by all the programs it runs at that moment, and decide that
        some of it may be reasonably removed from the RAM to make place for what you're asking for... and
        put it on the disk(!) instead
     -  Needless to say, it must then physically write it on the disk in order not to lose the contents
        of it, before it can return you that freed RAM block

3 - With the resulting memory block to be given to you, there's still much to do, as the OS must
        Possibly (and quite often, actually!) reorganize the pieces of free space to "coagulate" them
        into a contiguous block not smaller than the size you're asking for
        Reserve that block for you, which means marking it in use

4 - Conversely, when you free a block allocated on the heap (with free/delete/delete[] in C/C++), it
    must mark that block as being again available for reuse

5 - If your program is heavily multi-threaded (as are mine), then spare for the typically tiny TLS (Thread
    Local Storage), allocating on the heap must be atomic (because there's just one RAM, whatever number
    of threads you may be running), which means putting all other threads that may want to allocate at
    the same time on hold until all the jazz above is done.

And now you compare all of the above huge stuff with a single thing: just incrementing the stack pointer!!!!

How come? Simple: the stack is allocated at the start of the run of your program. There is no call to
a memory manager that would call the heap allocator - the stack pointer (a super-fast CPU register!) is
simply incremented, in a single CPU cycle.

Ah... and what if you run out of that stack space? Simple: your program will "simply" crash with stack
overflow - that's why you should never use large arrays as local variables (which are all put on the
stack): they may well cause a stack overflow.

Stack is very slightly riskier (only if you're not careful!)... but is catastrophically faster than the heap.


---

