filename: which-will-kill-current-or-voltage_20231023.txt
https://www.quora.com/Which-is-dangerous-1-volt-and-230-amps-of-current-or-230-volts-and-1-amp-of-current/answer/Jim-Brown-437

Which is dangerous: 1 volt and 230 amps of current or 230 volts and 1 amp of current?

230 amps of current would kill you instantly, IF you could get that much to flow through you, but you can't
with 1 volt. Your resistance is so high that 1 volt would only be able to push about 0.0001 amp of current
through you, even if you're wet.

230 volts will not be able to push 1 amp through you, although it can push enough to kill you under the
right circumstances.

So, 1 volt is not dangerous and 230 volts is dangerous.

When something has a current rating, that current is only going to flow through a low resistance. Your body
is a high resistance.

Edit: Several people have suggested edits and additional comments on this answer. I just read Wikipedia's 
Electrical injury" page and learned this topic is more complicated than I thought. Instead of me making this
edit very verbose, I suggest those interested read that Wikipedia entry.

I will post a quote from that page:

"The voltage necessary for electrocution depends on the current through the body and the duration of the
current. Ohm's law states that the current drawn depends on the resistance of the body. The resistance of
human skin varies from person to person and fluctuates between different times of day. The NIOSH states
"Under dry conditions, the resistance offered by the human body may be as high as 100,000 ohms. Wet or
broken skin may drop the body's resistance to 1,000 ohms," adding that "high-voltage electrical energy
quickly breaks down human skin, reducing the human body's resistance to 500 ohms".

It also says that an ohmmeter reading of the skin's resistance is not an accurate indication of what it will
be at a higher voltage. An ohmmeter only uses about 1 to 9 volts DC. That's why I have overestimated the
resistance of skin. I've measured my skin resistance many times and when dry, the ohmmeter registers
millions of Ω.

