filename: why-are-object-oriented-programming-languages-so-important_20180531.txt
https://www.quora.com/Why-are-object-oriented-programming-languages-so-important-What-do-they-achieve-make-possible-for-that-to-be-true

Why are object-oriented programming languages so important? What do they achieve/make possible for that to be
true?

The first programming languages, the ones designed in the 1950s, had no kind of flow-of-control at all, except
for if and goto. Programming in these languages was hard because flow of control became like spaghetti, going
every which-a-ways. It was very confusing to read code like this.

In the 1960s, languages like Algol-60 first became available that tamed this complexity with structured
flow-of-control concepts like while and for loops, and procedures. This turned out to make programming easier,
and programs easier to understand, so “structured programming” was born, making the use of goto anathema
(or haram if you’d rather). This allowed the reasonably straightforward creation of programs up to about
1,000 lines.

Only people didn’t want to stop making programs bigger when they got to 1,000 lines. Much larger programs
suffered from new classes of problem, like pollution of the global name space, so that a programmer working on
a big program couldn’t create a function with a simple name like “copy” because someone else had already used
that name. You couldn’t create a global variable with a simple name like “total” because that name was in use
already too. What was especially bad was when the language permitted these multiple declarations, and used a
variable or function that was not what the programmer expected.

To solve this problem, teams working on large programs invoked a disciplined use of naming, so that the copy
function had to be written as ThingCopy(). It named not only the action, but the kind of data upon which it
acted. And thus was object oriented programming born.

Object oriented programming solved the namespace-pollution problem by enclosing most functions and variables
inside objects. Now you could use function names like “copy”, because it looked like MyInstance.copy().
Instead of tens of thousands of global names, you had only hundreds. Yay. And the contents of each class
amounted to less than 1,000 lines. By actually enforcing the discipline that the best teams used, OO tamed the
complexity of large programs, and brought it down to the point where the tools of structured programming were
enough.

By the way, there are programs that are so big that OO begins to run into limitations, like the fact that
functions that act in the same way on a whole bunch of semantically related classes are a pain to type in over
and over. We solve that problem with generic programming, writing functions that take types as parameters.
Yeah, generic programming is useful even on smallish problems too.
