filename: youtube-dl_02_RWRP.txt
http://rg3.github.io/youtube-dl/documentation.html

youtube-dl	Documentation
Index

Getting started
More usage tips
Frequently Asked Questions
Supported sites
Proxy support
YouTube formats
Output template
Configuration
Getting started

In Windows save the exe version somewhere (in your PATH if you want to run it simply
as youtube-dl) and run it from the command line.

In Unix, download it, give it execution permission and copy it to one of the PATH
directories (typically, /usr/local/bin).

To update, simply call youtube-dl -U, we recommend to do it often.

After that, you should be able to call it from the command line as youtube-dl. I
will use youtube-dl in the following examples. Usage instructions are
easy. Use youtube-dl followed by a video URL or identifier. Example: youtube-dl
"http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=foobar". The video will be saved to the file
foobar.flv in that example. As YouTube.com videos are usually in Flash Video format,
their extension should be flv. In Linux and other unices, video players using a
recent version of ffmpeg can play them. That includes VLC, MPlayer, etc. Those two
work under Windows and other platforms, but you could also get a specific FLV player
of your taste.

If you try to run the program and you receive an error message containing the
keyword SyntaxError near the end, it means your Python interpreter is too old,
remember that youtube-dl need Python version 2.6, 2.7, or 3.3+.

More usage tips

The program is usually invoked as youtube-dl followed by options and the video
URLs. Listing all the options here would make this text too long, so you can run
youtube-dl --help and get a summary of them. From that point on you can start
experimenting with the different options yourself. The most common ones are -t (or
-l) to include the video title in the file name. Also, the -o option can specify
the output file name and path. It allows special character sequences that can be
used as templates to be replaced. See the "Output template" section for more details.

Some YouTube videos are served using Adobe's proprietary RTMP protocol, which imposes
DRM restrictions and encrypts the connection. youtube-dl is not able to download
these videos by itself. However, it will attempt to use the rtmpdump program,
if it's installed in your system, to download these videos.

Frequently Asked Questions

The Frequently Asked Questions page contains answers to some common questions that
pop up in my e-mail and in the issue tracker. Be sure to check it before reporting
problems.

Supported sites

YouTube.com.
YouTube.com playlists (playlist URLs in "view_play_list" form).
YouTube.com searches, using the special keyword "ytsearch" as a form of URL, as in
"ytsearch:cute kittens". Do not forget the quotes if you want to include spaces in
your search. Other variants are "ytsearchN" to download more than the first result,
with N being a number, and "ytsearchall".
YouTube.com user videos, using user page URLs or the specifc "ytuser" keyword.
metacafe.com.
Google Video.
Google Video searches ("gvsearch" keyword).
Photobucket videos.
Dailymotion.
DepositFiles.
blip.tv.
vimeo.
myvideo.de.
The Daily Show / Colbert Nation.
The Escapist.
CollegeHumor.
arte.tv.
Soundcloud.
xvideos.
infoq.
mixcloud.
Stanford Open Content.
Youku.
MTV.
XNXX.
Google Plus.
A generic downloader that works in some sites.
For a complete list, execute youtube-dl --list-extractors.

Proxy support

youtube-dl supports downloading videos through a proxy, by setting the http_proxy
environment variable to the proxy URL, as in http://proxy_machine_name:port/.

YouTube formats

Using the -f option and other related options, you can specify the video format to
be downloaded from YouTube. If you have an order of preference, specify the formats
separating them with slashes: -f 22/17/18. Instead of keeping a video format table
here, I will refer you to the list of YouTube formats on Wikipedia.

Output template

The -o option allows users to indicate a template for the output file names. The
basic usage is not to set any template arguments when downloading a single file,
like in youtube-dl -o funny_video.flv "http://some/video". However, it may contain
special sequences that will be replaced when downloading each video. The special
sequences have the format %(NAME)s. To clarify, that's a percent symbol followed
by a name in parenthesis, followed by a lowercase S. Allowed names are:

id: The sequence will be replaced by the video identifier.
url: The sequence will be replaced by the video URL.
uploader: The sequence will be replaced by the nickname of the person who uploaded
the video.
upload_date: The sequence will be replaced by the upload date in YYYYMMDD format.
title: The sequence will be replaced by the video title.
ext: The sequence will be replaced by the appropriate extension (like flv or mp4).
epoch: The sequence will be replaced by the Unix epoch when creating the file.
autonumber: The sequence will be replaced by a five-digit number that will be
increased with each download, starting at zero.
The current default template is %(id)s.%(ext)s, but that will be switchted to
%(title)s-%(id)s.%(ext)s (which can be requested with -t at the moment).

In some cases, you don't want special characters such as ?, spaces, or &, such
as when transferring the downloaded filename to a Windows system or the filename
through an 8bit-unsafe channel. In these cases, add the --restrict-filenames flag
to get a shorter title:

$ youtube-dl --get-filename -o "%(title)s.%(ext)s" BaW_jenozKc
youtube-dl test video ''_ð???.mp4    # All kinds of weird characters
$ youtube-dl --get-filename -o "%(title)s.%(ext)s" BaW_jenozKc --restrict-filenames
youtube-dl_test_video_.mp4	    # A simple file name

Configuration

You can configure youtube-dl by placing default arguments (such as
--extract-audio --no-mtime to always extract the audio and not copy the mtime)
into /etc/youtube-dl.conf and/or ~/.config/youtube-dl.conf. Arguments in these
files may be written across multiple lines, and any line beginning with the #
character will be treated as a comment.

---
http://howto.blbosti.com/2010/03/download-youtube-videos-with-youtube-dl/

Download YouTube videos with youtube-dl

YouTube logoyoutube-dl is a small command-line program to download videos from
YouTube.com. It requires the Python interpreter, version 2.x (x being at least 4),
and it's not platform specific. It should work in your Unix box, in Windows or in
Mac OS X.

Install & using

1. install youtube-dl

sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install youtube-dl
2. use this command to download files from YouTube

youtube-dl -o [name of output file] [YouTube URL]
3. To view all options youtube-dl, paste this in command line

man youtube-dl
To quit from manual press q key

Examples

1. Download classic flv type and save it as file.flv

youtube-dl -o file.flv "http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y54ABqSOScQ"
2. Download Full HD mp4 file and save it as file.mp4

youtube-dl -o file.mp4 -f 37 "http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y54ABqSOScQ"
This table from Wikipedia may be useful

Comparison of YouTube media types

[ image is on the next page ]


---
http://manpages.ubuntu.com/manpages/maverick/man1/youtube-dl.1.html

Name
Synopsis
Description
Options
Output Template
Author
maverick (1) youtube-dl.1.gz
Provided by: youtube-dl_2010.08.04-1_all bug

NAME
       youtube-dl - download videos from youtube.com

SYNOPSIS
	 youtube-dl [options] url ...

DESCRIPTION
       youtube-dl is a script to download videos from youtube.com.

       Once it is installed in your system, you should be able to call it from
       the command line. Usage instructions are easy. Use youtube-dl followed
       by a video URL or identifier. As an example, consider:

	 youtube-dl "http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=foobar"

       The video will be saved to the file "foobar.flv" in that example. Many
       YouTube.com videos are in Flash Video format and their extension would
       be "flv". Other videos are encoded in H.264 and these usually have the
       extension "mp4".  In Linux and other unices, video players using a
       recent version of ffmpeg can play them. That includes MPlayer, VLC,
       xine, among others.

OPTIONS
       youtube-dl accepts options in the following categories

       -h, --help
	   Print help text and exit.

       -v, --version
	   Print program version and exit.

       -U, --update
	   Update this program to the latest stable version.

       -i, --ignore-errors
	   Ignore errors during download and continue processing.

       -r L, --rate-limit=L
	   Limit the download speed to the specified maximum L (e.g., 50k or
	   44.6m).

       -R R, --retries=R
	   Number R of retries for a given download (default is 10).

       -u UN, --username=UN
	   Specify the youtube account username UN. Some videos require an
	   account to be downloaded, mostly because they're flagged as mature
	   content.

       -p PW, --password=PW
	   Like the username, specifies the account password to be PW.

       -n, --netrc
	   Get authentication data from the standard unix .netrc file on the
	   user's home directory. The machine name is youtube regarding this
	   usage.

       -f FMT, --format=FMT
	   Specify the video format (quality) in which to download the video.
	   Note that not all videos are available in all formats.

       -b, --best-quality
	   This option is deprecated, does nothing currently, and is expected
	   to be removed in a next release, as it is the current behavior of
	   youtube-dl.

       -m, --mobile-version
	   Synonymous to the option "-f 17", to download videos playable on
	   some mobile phones.

       --all-formats
	   Downloads all formats for which a video may be available.

       --max-quality=FMT
	   Limit the maximum quality of the videos to downloads to FMT.

       -q, --quiet
	   Activates quiet mode, avoiding many messages being written to the
	   terminal.

       -s, --simulate
	   Simulate the operation, but do not download the video. Useful for
	   testing.

       -g, --get-url
	   Simulate the operation, like quiet mode, but show the URL that
	   would be used to download the video. Can be used with other
	   download tools like wget or aria2c.

       -e, --get-title
	   Simulate the operation, like quiet mode, but show the title of the
	   video that would be downloaded.

       --get-thumbnail
	   Simulate the operation, like quiet mode, but print the URL of of
	   the video's thumbnail.

       --get-description
	   Simulate the operation, like quiet mode, but print the description
	   of the video.

       --no-progress
	   Do not print the progress bar during downloads.

       -t, --title
	   Use the title of the video in the file name used to download the
	   video.

       -l, --literal
	   Use the literal title of the video in file name used to download
	   the video. Can contain "weird" characters that are not filtered
	   like with the -t option.

       -o TPL, --output=TPL
	   Specify a template TPL for the names of the files to be created
	   when they are downloaded. The default filename is video_id.flv. But
	   you can also use the video title in the filename with the "-t" or
	   "--title" option, or preserve the literal title in the filename
	   with the "-l" or "--literal" option.

       -a F, --batch-file=F
	   Specify the name of a file containing URLs of videos to download
	   from youtube in batch mode. The file must contain one URL per line.

       -w, --no-overwrites
	   Do no overwrite already existing files.

       -c, --continue
	   Resume partially downloaded files.

OUTPUT TEMPLATE
       The -o option allows users to indicate a template for the output file
       names. The basic usage is not to set any template arguments when
       downloading a single file, like in youtube-dl -o funny_video.flv
       "http://some/video". However, it may contain special sequences that
       will be replaced when downloading each video.

       The special sequences have the format "%(NAME)s". To clarify, that's a
       percent symbol followed by a name in parenthesis, followed by a
       lowercase S. Allowed names are:

       id  The sequence will be replaced by the video identifier.

       url The sequence will be replaced by the video URL.

       uploader
	   The sequence will be replaced by the nickname of the person who
	   uploaded the video.

       title
	   The sequence will be replaced by the literal video title.

       stitle
	   The sequence will be replaced by a simplified video title,
	   restricted to alphanumeric characters and dashes.

       ext The sequence will be replaced by the appropriate extension (like
	   "flv" or "mp4").

       epoch
	   The sequence will be replaced by the Unix epoch when creating the
	   file.

       As you may have guessed, the default template is "%(id)s.%(ext)s". When
       some command line options are used, it's replaced by other templates
       like "%(title)s-%(id)s.%(ext)s". You can specify your own.

AUTHOR
       youtube-dl was written by Ricardo Garcia Gonzalez and many contributors
       from all around the internet.  This manpage was written by Rogerio
       Brito <rbrito@users.sf.net>.

---
