filename: debian_keeping-debian-uptodate_20241112.txt
https://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/debian-faq/uptodate.en.html

Chapter 9. Keeping your Debian system up-to-date

   One of Debian's goals is to provide a consistent upgrade path and a secure upgrade process. We always
   do our best to make upgrading to new releases a smooth procedure. In case there's some important note
   to add to the upgrade process, the packages will alert the user, and often provide a solution to a
   possible problem.

   You should also read the Release Notes document that describes the details of specific upgrades. It
   is available on the Debian website at https://www.debian.org/releases/stable/releasenotes and is
   also shipped on the Debian CDs, DVDs and Blu-ray discs.

9.1. How can I keep my Debian system current?
   One could simply visit a Debian archive site, then peruse the directories until one finds the desired
   file, and then fetch it, and finally install it using dpkg. Note that dpkg will install upgrade files
   in place, even on a running system. Sometimes, a revised package will require the installation of a
   newly revised version of another package, in which case the installation will fail until/unless the
   other package is installed.

   Many people find this approach much too time-consuming, since Debian evolves so quickly -- typically,
   a dozen or more new packages are uploaded every week. This number is larger just before a new major
   release. To deal with this avalanche, many people prefer to use a more automated method. Several
   different packages are available for this purpose:

9.1.1. aptitude
   aptitude is the recommended package manager for Debian GNU/Linux systems, and is described in
   Section 8.1.3, "aptitude".

   Before you can use aptitude to make an upgrade, you'll have to edit the /etc/apt/sources.list file to
   set it up. If you wish to upgrade to the latest stable version of Debian, you'll probably want to use
   a source like this one:
http://deb.debian.org/debian stable main contrib

   The mirror https://deb.debian.org/ is backed by a content-delivery network and requests to it
   will be directed to the closest instance to you. If you have a faster Debian mirror close to you, you
   can replace deb.debian.org with that one. See the mirror list at
   https://www.debian.org/mirror/list for more information.

   Or you can use the redirector service httpredir.debian.org which aims to solve the problem of
   choosing a Debian mirror. It uses the geographic location of the user and other information to choose
   the best mirror that can serve the files. To take advantage of it use a source like this one:
http://httpredir.debian.org/debian stable main contrib

   More details on this can be found in the sources.list(5) manual page.

   To update your system from the command line, run
$> aptitude update

   followed by
$> aptitude full-upgrade

   Answer any questions that might come up, and your system will be upgraded.

   Note that aptitude is not the recommended tool for doing upgrades from one Debian GNU/Linux release
   to another. Use apt-get instead. For upgrades between releases you should read the Release Notes.
   This document describes in detail the recommended steps for upgrades from previous releases as well
   as known issues you should consider before upgrading.

   For details, see the manual page aptitude(8), and the file /usr/share/aptitude/README.

9.1.2. apt-get and apt-cdrom
   An alternative to aptitude is apt-get which is an APT-based command-line tool (described previously
   in Section 8.1.2, "APT").

   apt-get, the APT-based command-line tool for handling packages, provides a simple, safe way to
   install and upgrade packages.

   To use apt-get, edit the /etc/apt/sources.list file to set it up, just as for Section 9.1.1,
   "aptitude".

   Then run
$> apt-get update

   followed by
$> apt-get dist-upgrade

   Answer any questions that might come up, and your system will be upgraded. See also the apt-get(8)
   manual page, as well as Section 8.1.2, "APT".

   If you want to use CDs/DVDs/BDs to install packages, you can use apt-cdrom. For details, please see
   the Release Notes, section "Adding APT sources from optical media".

   Please note that when you get and install the packages, you'll still have them kept in your /var
   directory hierarchy. To keep your partition from overflowing, remember to delete extra files using
   apt-get clean and apt-get autoclean, or to move them someplace else (hint: use apt-move).

9.2. Must I go into single user mode in order to upgrade a package?
   No. Packages can be upgraded in place, even in running systems. Debian has a start-stop-daemon
   program that is invoked to stop, then restart running process if necessary during a package upgrade.

9.3. Do I have to keep all those .deb archive files on my disk?
   No. If you have downloaded the files to your disk then after you have installed the packages, you can
   remove them from your system, e.g. by running aptitude clean.

9.4. How can I keep a log of the packages I added to the system? I'd like to know when upgrades and
     removals have occurred and on which packages!

   Passing the --log-option to dpkg makes dpkg log status change updates and actions. It logs both the
   dpkg-invokation (e.g.

2005-12-30 18:10:33 install hello 1.3.18 2.1.1-4

   ) and the results (e.g.

2005-12-30 18:10:35 status installed hello 2.1.1-4

   ) If you'd like to log all your dpkg invocations (even those done using frontends like aptitude), you
   could add
log /var/log/dpkg.log

   to your /etc/dpkg/dpkg.cfg. Be sure the created logfile gets rotated periodically. If you're using
   logrotate, this can be achieved by creating a file /etc/logrotate.d/dpkg with the following lines

/var/log/dpkg {
	missingok
	notifempty
}

   More details on dpkg logging can be found in the dpkg(1) manual page.

   aptitude logs the package installations, removals, and upgrades that it intends to perform to
   /var/log/aptitude. Note that the results of those actions are not recorded in this file!

   Another way to record your actions is to run your package management session within the script(1)
   program.

9.5. Can I automatically update the system?
   Yes. You can use cron-apt; this tool updates the system at regular intervals using a cron job. By
   default it just updates the package list and downloads new packages, but without installing them.

   Note: Automatic upgrade of packages is NOT recommended in testing or unstable systems as this might
   bring unexpected behaviour and remove packages without notice.

9.6. I have several machines; how can I download the updates only one time?
   If you have more than one Debian machine on your network, it is useful to use apt-cacher to keep all
   of your Debian systems up-to-date.

   apt-cacher reduces the bandwidth requirements of Debian mirrors by restricting the frequency of
   Packages, Releases and Sources file updates from the back end and only doing a single fetch for any
   file, independently of the actual request from the proxy. apt-cacher automatically builds a Debian
   HTTP mirror based on requests which pass through the proxy.

   Of course, you can get the same benefit if you are already using a standard caching proxy and all
   your systems are configured to use it.


---

