filename: gnu-readline-library-20260907.txt
https://tiswww.cwru.edu/php/chet/readline/readline.html#A-Short-Completion-Example

GNU Readline Library

   This document describes the GNU Readline Library, a utility which aids in the consistency of user
   interface across discrete programs which provide a command line interface. The Readline home page is
   http://www.gnu.org/software/readline/.

Table of Contents

     * 1 Command Line Editing
          + 1.1 Introduction to Line Editing
          + 1.2 Readline Interaction
               o 1.2.1 Readline Bare Essentials
               o 1.2.2 Readline Movement Commands
               o 1.2.3 Readline Killing Commands
               o 1.2.4 Readline Arguments
               o 1.2.5 Searching for Commands in the History
          + 1.3 Readline Init File
               o 1.3.1 Readline Init File Syntax
               o 1.3.2 Conditional Init Constructs
               o 1.3.3 Sample Init File
          + 1.4 Bindable Readline Commands
               o 1.4.1 Commands For Moving
               o 1.4.2 Commands For Manipulating The History
               o 1.4.3 Commands For Changing Text
               o 1.4.4 Killing And Yanking
               o 1.4.5 Specifying Numeric Arguments
               o 1.4.6 Letting Readline Type For You
               o 1.4.7 Keyboard Macros
               o 1.4.8 Some Miscellaneous Commands
          + 1.5 Readline vi Mode
     * 2 Programming with GNU Readline
          + 2.1 Basic Behavior
          + 2.2 Custom Functions
               o 2.2.1 Readline Typedefs
               o 2.2.2 Writing a New Function
          + 2.3 Readline Variables
          + 2.4 Readline Convenience Functions
               o 2.4.1 Naming a Function
               o 2.4.2 Selecting a Keymap
               o 2.4.3 Binding Keys
               o 2.4.4 Associating Function Names and Bindings
               o 2.4.5 Allowing Undoing
               o 2.4.6 Redisplay
               o 2.4.7 Modifying Text
               o 2.4.8 Character Input
               o 2.4.9 Terminal Management
               o 2.4.10 Utility Functions
               o 2.4.11 Miscellaneous Functions
               o 2.4.12 Alternate Interface
               o 2.4.13 A Readline Example
               o 2.4.14 Alternate Interface Example
          + 2.5 Readline Signal Handling
          + 2.6 Custom Completers
               o 2.6.1 How Completing Works
               o 2.6.2 Completion Functions
               o 2.6.3 Completion Variables
               o 2.6.4 A Short Completion Example
     * Appendix A GNU Free Documentation License
     * Concept Index
     * Function and Variable Index


1 Command Line Editing
   This chapter describes the basic features of the GNU command line editing interface.
     * Introduction to Line Editing
     * Readline Interaction
     * Readline Init File
     * Bindable Readline Commands
     * Readline vi Mode

1.1 Introduction to Line Editing
   The following paragraphs use Emacs style to describe the notation used to represent keystrokes.

   The text C-k is read as 'Control-K' and describes the character produced when the k key is pressed
   while the Control key is depressed.

   The text M-k is read as 'Meta-K' and describes the character produced when the Meta key (if you have
   one) is depressed, and the k key is pressed (a meta character), then both are released. The Meta key
   is labeled ALT or Option on many keyboards. On keyboards with two keys labeled ALT (usually to either
   side of the space bar), the ALT on the left side is generally set to work as a Meta key. One of the
   ALT keys may also be configured as some other modifier, such as a Compose key for typing accented
   characters.

   On some keyboards, the Meta key modifier produces characters with the eighth bit (0200) set. You can
   use the enable-meta-key variable to control whether or not it does this, if the keyboard allows it.
   On many others, the terminal or terminal emulator converts the metafied key to a key sequence
   beginning with ESC as described in the next paragraph.

   If you do not have a Meta or ALT key, or another key working as a Meta key, you can generally achieve
   the latter effect by typing ESC first, and then typing k. The ESC character is known as the meta
   prefix).

   Either process is known as metafying the k key.

   If your Meta key produces a key sequence with the ESC meta prefix, you can make M-key key bindings
   you specify (see Key Bindings in Readline Init File Syntax) do the same thing by setting the
   force-meta-prefix variable.

   The text M-C-k is read as 'Meta-Control-k' and describes the character produced by metafying C-k.

   In addition, several keys have their own names. Specifically, DEL, ESC, LFD, SPC, RET, and TAB all
   stand for themselves when seen in this text, or in an init file (see Readline Init File). If your
   keyboard lacks a LFD key, typing C-j will output the appropriate character. The RET key may be
   labeled Return or Enter on some keyboards.

1.2 Readline Interaction
   Often during an interactive session you type in a long line of text, only to notice that the first
   word on the line is misspelled. The Readline library gives you a set of commands for manipulating the
   text as you type it in, allowing you to just fix your typo, and not forcing you to retype the
   majority of the line. Using these editing commands, you move the cursor to the place that needs
   correction, and delete or insert the text of the corrections. Then, when you are satisfied with the
   line, you simply press RET. You do not have to be at the end of the line to press RET; the entire
   line is accepted regardless of the location of the cursor within the line.
     * Readline Bare Essentials
     * Readline Movement Commands
     * Readline Killing Commands
     * Readline Arguments
     * Searching for Commands in the History

1.2.1 Readline Bare Essentials
   In order to enter characters into the line, simply type them. The typed character appears where the
   cursor was, and then the cursor moves one space to the right. If you mistype a character, you can use
   your erase character to back up and delete the mistyped character.

   Sometimes you may mistype a character, and not notice the error until you have typed several other
   characters. In that case, you can type C-b to move the cursor to the left, and then correct your
   mistake. Afterwards, you can move the cursor to the right with C-f.

   When you add text in the middle of a line, you will notice that characters to the right of the cursor
   are 'pushed over' to make room for the text that you have inserted. Likewise, when you delete text
   behind the cursor, characters to the right of the cursor are 'pulled back' to fill in the blank space
   created by the removal of the text. These are the bare essentials for editing the text of an input
   line:

   C-b
          Move back one character.

   C-f
          Move forward one character.

   DEL or Backspace
          Delete the character to the left of the cursor.

   C-d
          Delete the character underneath the cursor.

   Printing characters
          Insert the character into the line at the cursor.

   C-_ or C-x C-u
          Undo the last editing command. You can undo all the way back to an empty line.

   Depending on your configuration, the Backspace key might be set to delete the character to the left
   of the cursor and the DEL key set to delete the character underneath the cursor, like C-d, rather
   than the character to the left of the cursor.

1.2.2 Readline Movement Commands
   The above table describes the most basic keystrokes that you need in order to do editing of the input
   line. For your convenience, many other commands are available in addition to C-b, C-f, C-d, and DEL.
   Here are some commands for moving more rapidly within the line.

   C-a
          Move to the start of the line.

   C-e
          Move to the end of the line.

   M-f
          Move forward a word, where a word is composed of letters and digits.

   M-b
          Move backward a word.

   C-l
          Clear the screen, reprinting the current line at the top.

   Notice how C-f moves forward a character, while M-f moves forward a word. It is a loose convention
   that control keystrokes operate on characters while meta keystrokes operate on words.

1.2.3 Readline Killing Commands
   Killing text means to delete the text from the line, but to save it away for later use, usually by
   yanking (re-inserting) it back into the line. ('Cut' and 'paste' are more recent jargon for 'kill'
   and 'yank'.)

   If the description for a command says that it 'kills' text, then you can be sure that you can get the
   text back in a different (or the same) place later.

   When you use a kill command, the text is saved in a kill-ring. Any number of consecutive kills save
   all of the killed text together, so that when you yank it back, you get it all. The kill ring is not
   line specific; the text that you killed on a previously typed line is available to be yanked back
   later, when you are typing another line.

   Here is the list of commands for killing text.

   C-k
          Kill the text from the current cursor position to the end of the line.

   M-d
          Kill from the cursor to the end of the current word, or, if between words, to the end of the
          next word. Word boundaries are the same as those used by M-f.

   M-DEL
          Kill from the cursor to the start of the current word, or, if between words, to the start of
          the previous word. Word boundaries are the same as those used by M-b.

   C-w
          Kill from the cursor to the previous whitespace. This is different than M-DEL because the word
          boundaries differ.

   Here is how to yank the text back into the line. Yanking means to copy the most-recently-killed text
   from the kill buffer into the line at the current cursor position.

   C-y
          Yank the most recently killed text back into the buffer at the cursor.

   M-y
          Rotate the kill-ring, and yank the new top. You can only do this if the prior command is C-y
          or M-y.

1.2.4 Readline Arguments
   You can pass numeric arguments to Readline commands. Sometimes the argument acts as a repeat count,
   other times it is the sign of the argument that is significant. If you pass a negative argument to a
   command which normally acts in a forward direction, that command will act in a backward direction.
   For example, to kill text back to the start of the line, you might type 'M-- C-k'.

   The general way to pass numeric arguments to a command is to type meta digits before the command. If
   the first 'digit' typed is a minus sign ('-'), then the sign of the argument will be negative. Once
   you have typed one meta digit to get the argument started, you can type the remainder of the digits,
   and then the command. For example, to give the C-d command an argument of 10, you could type 'M-1 0
   C-d', which will delete the next ten characters on the input line.

1.2.5 Searching for Commands in the History
   Readline provides commands for searching through the command history for lines containing a specified
   string. There are two search modes: incremental and non-incremental.

   Incremental searches begin before the user has finished typing the search string. As each character
   of the search string is typed, Readline displays the next entry from the history matching the string
   typed so far. An incremental search requires only as many characters as needed to find the desired
   history entry. When using emacs editing mode, type C-r to search backward in the history for a
   particular string. Typing C-s searches forward through the history. The characters present in the
   value of the isearch-terminators variable are used to terminate an incremental search. If that
   variable has not been assigned a value, the ESC and C-j characters terminate an incremental search.
   C-g aborts an incremental search and restores the original line. When the search is terminated, the
   history entry containing the search string becomes the current line.

   To find other matching entries in the history list, type C-r or C-s as appropriate. This searches
   backward or forward in the history for the next entry matching the search string typed so far. Any
   other key sequence bound to a Readline command terminates the search and executes that command. For
   instance, a RET terminates the search and accepts the line, thereby executing the command from the
   history list. A movement command will terminate the search, make the last line found the current
   line, and begin editing.

   Readline remembers the last incremental search string. If two C-rs are typed without any intervening
   characters defining a new search string, Readline uses any remembered search string.

   Non-incremental searches read the entire search string before starting to search for matching history
   entries. The search string may be typed by the user or be part of the contents of the current line.

1.3 Readline Init File
   Although the Readline library comes with a set of Emacs-like keybindings installed by default, it is
   possible to use a different set of keybindings. Any user can customize programs that use Readline by
   putting commands in an inputrc file, conventionally in their home directory. The name of this file is
   taken from the value of the environment variable INPUTRC. If that variable is unset, the default is
   ~/.inputrc. If that file does not exist or cannot be read, Readline looks for /etc/inputrc.

   When a program that uses the Readline library starts up, Readline reads the init file and sets any
   variables and key bindings it contains.

   In addition, the C-x C-r command re-reads this init file, thus incorporating any changes that you
   might have made to it.
     * Readline Init File Syntax
     * Conditional Init Constructs
     * Sample Init File

1.3.1 Readline Init File Syntax
   There are only a few basic constructs allowed in the Readline init file. Blank lines are ignored.
   Lines beginning with a '#' are comments. Lines beginning with a '$' indicate conditional constructs
   (see Conditional Init Constructs). Other lines denote variable settings and key bindings.

   Variable Settings
          You can modify the run-time behavior of Readline by altering the values of variables in
          Readline using the set command within the init file. The syntax is simple:
set variable value

          Here, for example, is how to change from the default Emacs-like key binding to use vi line
          editing commands:
set editing-mode vi

          Variable names and values, where appropriate, are recognized without regard to case.
          Unrecognized variable names are ignored.

          Boolean variables (those that can be set to on or off) are set to on if the value is null or
          empty, on (case-insensitive), or 1. Any other value results in the variable being set to off.

          A great deal of run-time behavior is changeable with the following variables.

        active-region-start-color
                A string variable that controls the text color and background when displaying the text
                in the active region (see the description of enable-active-region below). This string
                must not take up any physical character positions on the display, so it should consist
                only of terminal escape sequences. It is output to the terminal before displaying the
                text in the active region. This variable is reset to the default value whenever the
                terminal type changes. The default value is the string that puts the terminal in
                standout mode, as obtained from the terminal´s terminfo description. A sample value
                might be '\e[01;33m'.

        active-region-end-color
                A string variable that "undoes" the effects of active-region-start-color and restores
                "normal" terminal display appearance after displaying text in the active region. This
                string must not take up any physical character positions on the display, so it should
                consist only of terminal escape sequences. It is output to the terminal after displaying
                the text in the active region. This variable is reset to the default value whenever the
                terminal type changes. The default value is the string that restores the terminal from
                standout mode, as obtained from the terminal´s terminfo description. A sample value
                might be '\e[0m'.

        bell-style
                Controls what happens when Readline wants to ring the terminal bell. If set to 'none',
                Readline never rings the bell. If set to 'visible', Readline uses a visible bell if one
                is available. If set to 'audible' (the default), Readline attempts to ring the
                terminal´s bell.

        bind-tty-special-chars
                If set to 'on' (the default), Readline attempts to bind the control characters that are
                treated specially by the kernel´s terminal driver to their Readline equivalents. These
                override the default Readline bindings described here. Type 'stty -a' at a Bash prompt
                to see your current terminal settings, including the special control characters (usually
                cchars).

        blink-matching-paren
                If set to 'on', Readline attempts to briefly move the cursor to an opening parenthesis
                when a closing parenthesis is inserted. The default is 'off'.

        colored-completion-prefix
                If set to 'on', when listing completions, Readline displays the common prefix of the set
                of possible completions using a different color. The color definitions are taken from
                the value of the LS_COLORS environment variable. If there is a color definition in
                LS_COLORS for the custom suffix 'readline-colored-completion-prefix', Readline uses this
                color for the common prefix instead of its default. The default is 'off'.

        colored-stats
                If set to 'on', Readline displays possible completions using different colors to
                indicate their file type. The color definitions are taken from the value of the
                LS_COLORS environment variable. The default is 'off'.

        comment-begin
                The string to insert at the beginning of the line by the insert-comment command. The
                default value is "#".

        completion-display-width
                The number of screen columns used to display possible matches when performing
                completion. The value is ignored if it is less than 0 or greater than the terminal
                screen width. A value of 0 causes matches to be displayed one per line. The default
                value is -1.

        completion-ignore-case
                If set to 'on', Readline performs filename matching and completion in a case-insensitive
                fashion. The default value is 'off'.

        completion-map-case
                If set to 'on', and completion-ignore-case is enabled, Readline treats hyphens ('-') and
                underscores ('_') as equivalent when performing case-insensitive filename matching and
                completion. The default value is 'off'.

        completion-prefix-display-length
                The maximum length in characters of the common prefix of a list of possible completions
                that is displayed without modification. When set to a value greater than zero, Readline
                replaces common prefixes longer than this value with an ellipsis when displaying
                possible completions. If a completion begins with a period, and Readline is completing
                filenames, it uses three underscores instead of an ellipsis.

        completion-query-items
                The number of possible completions that determines when the user is asked whether the
                list of possibilities should be displayed. If the number of possible completions is
                greater than or equal to this value, Readline asks whether or not the user wishes to
                view them; otherwise, Readline simply lists the completions. This variable must be set
                to an integer value greater than or equal to zero. A zero value means Readline should
                never ask; negative values are treated as zero. The default limit is 100.

        convert-meta
                If set to 'on', Readline converts characters it reads that have the eighth bit set to an
                ASCII key sequence by clearing the eighth bit and prefixing an ESC character, converting
                them to a meta-prefixed key sequence. The default value is 'on', but Readline sets it to
                'off' if the locale contains characters whose encodings may include bytes with the
                eighth bit set. This variable is dependent on the LC_CTYPE locale category, and may
                change if the locale changes. This variable also affects key bindings; see the
                description of force-meta-prefix below.

        disable-completion
                If set to 'On', Readline inhibits word completion. Completion characters are inserted
                into the line as if they had been mapped to self-insert. The default is 'off'.

        echo-control-characters
                When set to 'on', on operating systems that indicate they support it, Readline echoes a
                character corresponding to a signal generated from the keyboard. The default is 'on'.

        editing-mode
                The editing-mode variable controls the default set of key bindings. By default, Readline
                starts up in emacs editing mode, where the keystrokes are most similar to Emacs. This
                variable can be set to either 'emacs' or 'vi'.

        emacs-mode-string
                If the show-mode-in-prompt variable is enabled, this string is displayed immediately
                before the last line of the primary prompt when emacs editing mode is active. The value
                is expanded like a key binding, so the standard set of meta- and control- prefixes and
                backslash escape sequences is available. The '\1' and '\2' escapes begin and end
                sequences of non-printing characters, which can be used to embed a terminal control
                sequence into the mode string. The default is '@'.

        enable-active-region
                point is the current cursor position, and mark refers to a saved cursor position (see
                Commands For Moving). The text between the point and mark is referred to as the
                region. When this variable is set to 'On', Readline allows certain commands to designate
                the region as active. When the region is active, Readline highlights the text in the
                region using the value of the active-region-start-color, which defaults to the string
                that enables the terminal´s standout mode. The active region shows the text inserted by
                bracketed-paste and any matching text found by incremental and non-incremental history
                searches. The default is 'On'.

        enable-bracketed-paste
                When set to 'On', Readline configures the terminal to insert each paste into the editing
                buffer as a single string of characters, instead of treating each character as if it had
                been read from the keyboard. This is called putting the terminal into bracketed paste
                mode; it prevents Readline from executing any editing commands bound to key sequences
                appearing in the pasted text. The default is 'On'.

        enable-keypad
                When set to 'on', Readline tries to enable the application keypad when it is called.
                Some systems need this to enable the arrow keys. The default is 'off'.

        enable-meta-key
                When set to 'on', Readline tries to enable any meta modifier key the terminal claims to
                support when it is called. On many terminals, the Meta key is used to send eight-bit
                characters; this variable checks for the terminal capability that indicates the terminal
                can enable and disable a mode that sets the eighth bit of a character (0200) if the Meta
                key is held down when the character is typed (a meta character). The default is 'on'.

        expand-tilde
                If set to 'on', Readline attempts tilde expansion when it attempts word completion. The
                default is 'off'.

        force-meta-prefix
                If set to 'on', Readline modifies its behavior when binding key sequences containing \M-
                or Meta- (see Key Bindings in Readline Init File Syntax) by converting a key
                sequence of the form \M-C or Meta-C to the two-character sequence ESC C (adding the meta
                prefix). If force-meta-prefix is set to 'off' (the default), Readline uses the value of
                the convert-meta variable to determine whether to perform this conversion: if
                convert-meta is 'on', Readline performs the conversion described above; if it is 'off',
                Readline converts C to a meta character by setting the eighth bit (0200). The default is
                'off'.

        history-preserve-point
                If set to 'on', the history code attempts to place the point (the current cursor
                position) at the same location on each history line retrieved with previous-history or
                next-history. The default is 'off'.

        history-size
                Set the maximum number of history entries saved in the history list. If set to zero, any
                existing history entries are deleted and no new entries are saved. If set to a value
                less than zero, the number of history entries is not limited. By default, the number of
                history entries is not limited. If you try to set history-size to a non-numeric value,
                the maximum number of history entries will be set to 500.

        horizontal-scroll-mode
                Setting this variable to 'on' means that the text of the lines being edited will scroll
                horizontally on a single screen line when the lines are longer than the width of the
                screen, instead of wrapping onto a new screen line. This variable is automatically set
                to 'on' for terminals of height 1. By default, this variable is set to 'off'.

        input-meta
                If set to 'on', Readline enables eight-bit input (that is, it does not clear the eighth
                bit in the characters it reads), regardless of what the terminal claims it can support.
                The default value is 'off', but Readline sets it to 'on' if the locale contains
                characters whose encodings may include bytes with the eighth bit set. This variable is
                dependent on the LC_CTYPE locale category, and its value may change if the locale
                changes. The name meta-flag is a synonym for input-meta.

        isearch-terminators
                The string of characters that should terminate an incremental search without
                subsequently executing the character as a command (see Searching for Commands in
                the History). If this variable has not been given a value, the characters ESC and C-j
                terminate an incremental search.

        keymap
                Sets Readline´s idea of the current keymap for key binding commands. Built-in keymap
                names are emacs, emacs-standard, emacs-meta, emacs-ctlx, vi, vi-move, vi-command, and
                vi-insert. vi is equivalent to vi-command (vi-move is also a synonym); emacs is
                equivalent to emacs-standard. Applications may add additional names. The default value
                is emacs; the value of the editing-mode variable also affects the default keymap.

        keyseq-timeout
                Specifies the duration Readline will wait for a character when reading an ambiguous key
                sequence (one that can form a complete key sequence using the input read so far, or can
                take additional input to complete a longer key sequence). If Readline doesn´t receive
                any input within the timeout, it uses the shorter but complete key sequence. Readline
                uses this value to determine whether or not input is available on the current input
                source (rl_instream by default). The value is specified in milliseconds, so a value of
                1000 means that Readline will wait one second for additional input. If this variable is
                set to a value less than or equal to zero, or to a non-numeric value, Readline waits
                until another key is pressed to decide which key sequence to complete. The default value
                is 500.

        mark-directories
                If set to 'on', completed directory names have a slash appended. The default is 'on'.

        mark-modified-lines
                When this variable is set to 'on', Readline displays an asterisk ('*') at the start of
                history lines which have been modified. This variable is 'off' by default.

        mark-symlinked-directories
                If set to 'on', completed names which are symbolic links to directories have a slash
                appended, subject to the value of mark-directories. The default is 'off'.

        match-hidden-files
                This variable, when set to 'on', forces Readline to match files whose names begin with a
                '.' (hidden files) when performing filename completion. If set to 'off', the user must
                include the leading '.' in the filename to be completed. This variable is 'on' by
                default.

        menu-complete-display-prefix
                If set to 'on', menu completion displays the common prefix of the list of possible
                completions (which may be empty) before cycling through the list. The default is 'off'.

        output-meta
                If set to 'on', Readline displays characters with the eighth bit set directly rather
                than as a meta-prefixed escape sequence. The default is 'off', but Readline sets it to
                'on' if the locale contains characters whose encodings may include bytes with the eighth
                bit set. This variable is dependent on the LC_CTYPE locale category, and its value may
                change if the locale changes.

        page-completions
                If set to 'on', Readline uses an internal pager resembling more(1) to display a
                screenful of possible completions at a time. This variable is 'on' by default.

        prefer-visible-bell
                See bell-style.

        print-completions-horizontally
                If set to 'on', Readline displays completions with matches sorted horizontally in
                alphabetical order, rather than down the screen. The default is 'off'.

        revert-all-at-newline
                If set to 'on', Readline will undo all changes to history lines before returning when
                executing accept-line. By default, history lines may be modified and retain individual
                undo lists across calls to readline(). The default is 'off'.

        search-ignore-case
                If set to 'on', Readline performs incremental and non-incremental history list searches
                in a case-insensitive fashion. The default value is 'off'.

        show-all-if-ambiguous
                This alters the default behavior of the completion functions. If set to 'on', words
                which have more than one possible completion cause the matches to be listed immediately
                instead of ringing the bell. The default value is 'off'.

        show-all-if-unmodified
                This alters the default behavior of the completion functions in a fashion similar to
                show-all-if-ambiguous. If set to 'on', words which have more than one possible
                completion without any possible partial completion (the possible completions don´t share
                a common prefix) cause the matches to be listed immediately instead of ringing the bell.
                The default value is 'off'.

        show-mode-in-prompt
                If set to 'on', add a string to the beginning of the prompt indicating the editing mode:
                emacs, vi command, or vi insertion. The mode strings are user-settable (e.g.,
                emacs-mode-string). The default value is 'off'.

        skip-completed-text
                If set to 'on', this alters the default completion behavior when inserting a single
                match into the line. It´s only active when performing completion in the middle of a
                word. If enabled, Readline does not insert characters from the completion that match
                characters after point in the word being completed, so portions of the word following
                the cursor are not duplicated. For instance, if this is enabled, attempting completion
                when the cursor is after the first 'e' in 'Makefile' will result in 'Makefile' rather
                than 'Makefilefile', assuming there is a single possible completion. The default value
                is 'off'.

        vi-cmd-mode-string
                If the show-mode-in-prompt variable is enabled, this string is displayed immediately
                before the last line of the primary prompt when vi editing mode is active and in command
                mode. The value is expanded like a key binding, so the standard set of meta- and
                control- prefixes and backslash escape sequences is available. The '\1' and '\2' escapes
                begin and end sequences of non-printing characters, which can be used to embed a
                terminal control sequence into the mode string. The default is '(cmd)'.

        vi-ins-mode-string
                If the show-mode-in-prompt variable is enabled, this string is displayed immediately
                before the last line of the primary prompt when vi editing mode is active and in
                insertion mode. The value is expanded like a key binding, so the standard set of meta-
                and control- prefixes and backslash escape sequences is available. The '\1' and '\2'
                escapes begin and end sequences of non-printing characters, which can be used to embed a
                terminal control sequence into the mode string. The default is '(ins)'.

        visible-stats
                If set to 'on', a character denoting a file´s type is appended to the filename when
                listing possible completions. The default is 'off'.

   Key Bindings
          The syntax for controlling key bindings in the init file is simple. First you need to find the
          name of the command that you want to change. The following sections contain tables of the
          command name, the default keybinding, if any, and a short description of what the command
          does.

          Once you know the name of the command, simply place on a line in the init file the name of the
          key you wish to bind the command to, a colon, and then the name of the command. There can be
          no space between the key name and the colon - that will be interpreted as part of the key
          name. The name of the key can be expressed in different ways, depending on what you find most
          comfortable.

          In addition to command names, Readline allows keys to be bound to a string that is inserted
          when the key is pressed (a macro). The difference between a macro and a command is that a
          macro is enclosed in single or double quotes.

        keyname: function-name or macro
                keyname is the name of a key spelled out in English. For example:

Control-u: universal-argument
Meta-Rubout: backward-kill-word
Control-o: "> output"

                In the example above, C-u is bound to the function universal-argument, M-DEL is bound to
                the function backward-kill-word, and C-o is bound to run the macro expressed on the
                right hand side (that is, to insert the text '> output' into the line).

                This key binding syntax recognizes a number of symbolic character names: DEL, ESC,
                ESCAPE, LFD, NEWLINE, RET, RETURN, RUBOUT (a destructive backspace), SPACE, SPC, and
                TAB.

        "keyseq": function-name or macro
                keyseq differs from keyname above in that strings denoting an entire key sequence can be
                specified, by placing the key sequence in double quotes. Some GNU Emacs style key
                escapes can be used, as in the following example, but none of the special character
                names are recognized.

"\C-u": universal-argument
"\C-x\C-r": re-read-init-file
"\e[11~": "Function Key 1"

                In the above example, C-u is again bound to the function universal-argument (just as it
                was in the first example), 'C-x C-r' is bound to the function re-read-init-file, and
                'ESC [ 1 1 ~' is bound to insert the text 'Function Key 1'.

          The following GNU Emacs style escape sequences are available when specifying key sequences:

        \C-
                A control prefix.

        \M-
                Adding the meta prefix or converting the following character to a meta character, as
                described above under force-meta-prefix (see Variable Settings in Readline Init
                File Syntax).

        \e
                An escape character.

        \\
                Backslash.

        \"
                ", a double quotation mark.

        \'
                ', a single quote or apostrophe.

          In addition to the GNU Emacs style escape sequences, a second set of backslash escapes is
          available:

        \a
                alert (bell)

        \b
                backspace

        \d
                delete

        \f
                form feed

        \n
                newline

        \r
                carriage return

        \t
                horizontal tab

        \v
                vertical tab

        \nnn
                The eight-bit character whose value is the octal value nnn (one to three digits).

        \xHH
                The eight-bit character whose value is the hexadecimal value HH (one or two hex digits).

          When entering the text of a macro, single or double quotes must be used to indicate a macro
          definition. Unquoted text is assumed to be a function name. The backslash escapes described
          above are expanded in the macro body. Backslash will quote any other character in the macro
          text, including '"' and '''. For example, the following binding will make 'C-x \' insert a
          single '\' into the line:

"\C-x\\": "\\"

1.3.2 Conditional Init Constructs
   Readline implements a facility similar in spirit to the conditional compilation features of the C
   preprocessor which allows key bindings and variable settings to be performed as the result of tests.
   There are four parser directives available.

   $if
          The $if construct allows bindings to be made based on the editing mode, the terminal being
          used, or the application using Readline. The text of the test, after any comparison operator,
          extends to the end of the line; unless otherwise noted, no characters are required to isolate
          it.

        mode
                The mode= form of the $if directive is used to test whether Readline is in emacs or vi
                mode. This may be used in conjunction with the 'set keymap' command, for instance, to
                set bindings in the emacs-standard and emacs-ctlx keymaps only if Readline is starting
                out in emacs mode.

        term
                The term= form may be used to include terminal-specific key bindings, perhaps to bind
                the key sequences output by the terminal´s function keys. The word on the right side of
                the '=' is tested against both the full name of the terminal and the portion of the
                terminal name before the first '-'. This allows xterm to match both xterm and
                xterm-256color, for instance.

        version
                The version test may be used to perform comparisons against specific Readline versions.
                The version expands to the current Readline version. The set of comparison operators
                includes '=' (and '=='), '!=', '<=', '>=', '<', and '>'. The version number supplied on
                the right side of the operator consists of a major version number, an optional decimal
                point, and an optional minor version (e.g., '7.1'). If the minor version is omitted, it
                defaults to '0'. The operator may be separated from the string version and from the
                version number argument by whitespace. The following example sets a variable if the
                Readline version being used is 7.0 or newer:

$if version >= 7.0
set show-mode-in-prompt on
$endif

        application
                The application construct is used to include application-specific settings. Each program
                using the Readline library sets the application name, and you can test for a particular
                value. This could be used to bind key sequences to functions useful for a specific
                program. For instance, the following command adds a key sequence that quotes the current
                or previous word in Bash:

$if Bash
# Quote the current or previous word
"\C-xq": "\eb\"\ef\""
$endif

        variable
                The variable construct provides simple equality tests for Readline variables and values.
                The permitted comparison operators are '=', '==', and '!='. The variable name must be
                separated from the comparison operator by whitespace; the operator may be separated from
                the value on the right hand side by whitespace. String and boolean variables may be
                tested. Boolean variables must be tested against the values on and off. The following
                example is equivalent to the mode=emacs test described above:

$if editing-mode == emacs
set show-mode-in-prompt on
$endif

   $else
          Commands in this branch of the $if directive are executed if the test fails.

   $endif
          This command, as seen in the previous example, terminates an $if command.

   $include
          This directive takes a single filename as an argument and reads commands and key bindings from
          that file. For example, the following directive reads from /etc/inputrc:

$include /etc/inputrc

1.3.3 Sample Init File
   Here is an example of an inputrc file. This illustrates key binding, variable assignment, and
   conditional syntax.
# This file controls the behavior of line input editing for
# programs that use the GNU Readline library.  Existing
# programs include FTP, Bash, and GDB.
#
# You can re-read the inputrc file with C-x C-r.
# Lines beginning with '#' are comments.
#
# First, include any system-wide bindings and variable
# assignments from /etc/Inputrc
$include /etc/Inputrc

#
# Set various bindings for emacs mode.

set editing-mode emacs

$if mode=emacs

Meta-Control-h: backward-kill-word      Text after the function name is ignored

#
# Arrow keys in keypad mode
#
#"\M-OD":        backward-char
#"\M-OC":        forward-char
#"\M-OA":        previous-history
#"\M-OB":        next-history
#
# Arrow keys in ANSI mode
#
"\M-[D":        backward-char
"\M-[C":        forward-char
"\M-[A":        previous-history
"\M-[B":        next-history
#
# Arrow keys in 8 bit keypad mode
#
#"\M-\C-OD":       backward-char
#"\M-\C-OC":       forward-char
#"\M-\C-OA":       previous-history
#"\M-\C-OB":       next-history
#
# Arrow keys in 8 bit ANSI mode
#
#"\M-\C-[D":       backward-char
#"\M-\C-[C":       forward-char
#"\M-\C-[A":       previous-history
#"\M-\C-[B":       next-history

C-q: quoted-insert

$endif

# An old-style binding.  This happens to be the default.
TAB: complete

# Macros that are convenient for shell interaction
$if Bash
# edit the path
"\C-xp": "PATH=${PATH}\e\C-e\C-a\ef\C-f"
# prepare to type a quoted word --
# insert open and close double quotes
# and move to just after the open quote
"\C-x\"": "\"\"\C-b"
# insert a backslash (testing backslash escapes
# in sequences and macros)
"\C-x\\": "\\"
# Quote the current or previous word
"\C-xq": "\eb\"\ef\""
# Add a binding to refresh the line, which is unbound
"\C-xr": redraw-current-line
# Edit variable on current line.
"\M-\C-v": "\C-a\C-k$\C-y\M-\C-e\C-a\C-y="
$endif

# use a visible bell if one is available
set bell-style visible

# don´t strip characters to 7 bits when reading
set input-meta on

# allow iso-latin1 characters to be inserted rather
# than converted to prefix-meta sequences
set convert-meta off

# display characters with the eighth bit set directly
# rather than as meta-prefixed characters
set output-meta on

# if there are 150 or more possible completions for a word,
# ask whether or not the user wants to see all of them
set completion-query-items 150

# For FTP
$if Ftp
"\C-xg": "get \M-?"
"\C-xt": "put \M-?"
"\M-.": yank-last-arg
$endif

1.4 Bindable Readline Commands
   This section describes Readline commands that may be bound to key sequences. Command names without an
   accompanying key sequence are unbound by default.

   In the following descriptions, point refers to the current cursor position, and mark refers to a
   cursor position saved by the set-mark command. The text between the point and mark is referred to as
   the region. Readline has the concept of an active region: when the region is active, Readline
   redisplay highlights the region using the value of the active-region-start-color variable. The
   enable-active-region variable turns this on and off. Several commands set the region to active; those
   are noted below.
     * Commands For Moving
     * Commands For Manipulating The History
     * Commands For Changing Text
     * Killing And Yanking
     * Specifying Numeric Arguments
     * Letting Readline Type For You
     * Keyboard Macros
     * Some Miscellaneous Commands

1.4.1 Commands For Moving
   beginning-of-line (C-a)
          Move to the start of the current line. This may also be bound to the Home key on some
          keyboards.

   end-of-line (C-e)
          Move to the end of the line. This may also be bound to the End key on some keyboards.

   forward-char (C-f)
          Move forward a character. This may also be bound to the right arrow key on some keyboards.

   backward-char (C-b)
          Move back a character. This may also be bound to the left arrow key on some keyboards.

   forward-word (M-f)
          Move forward to the end of the next word. Words are composed of letters and digits.

   backward-word (M-b)
          Move back to the start of the current or previous word. Words are composed of letters and
          digits.

   previous-screen-line ()
          Attempt to move point to the same physical screen column on the previous physical screen line.
          This will not have the desired effect if the current Readline line does not take up more than
          one physical line or if point is not greater than the length of the prompt plus the screen
          width.

   next-screen-line ()
          Attempt to move point to the same physical screen column on the next physical screen line.
          This will not have the desired effect if the current Readline line does not take up more than
          one physical line or if the length of the current Readline line is not greater than the length
          of the prompt plus the screen width.

   clear-display (M-C-l)
          Clear the screen and, if possible, the terminal´s scrollback buffer, then redraw the current
          line, leaving the current line at the top of the screen.

   clear-screen (C-l)
          Clear the screen, then redraw the current line, leaving the current line at the top of the
          screen. If given a numeric argument, this refreshes the current line without clearing the
          screen.

   redraw-current-line ()
          Refresh the current line. By default, this is unbound.

1.4.2 Commands For Manipulating The History
   accept-line (Newline or Return)
          Accept the line regardless of where the cursor is. If this line is non-empty, you can add it
          to the history list using add_history(). If this line is a modified history line, then restore
          the history line to its original state.

   previous-history (C-p)
          Move 'back' through the history list, fetching the previous command. This may also be bound to
          the up arrow key on some keyboards.

   next-history (C-n)
          Move 'forward' through the history list, fetching the next command. This may also be bound to
          the down arrow key on some keyboards.

   beginning-of-history (M-<)
          Move to the first line in the history.

   end-of-history (M->)
          Move to the end of the input history, i.e., the line currently being entered.

   reverse-search-history (C-r)
          Search backward starting at the current line and moving 'up' through the history as necessary.
          This is an incremental search. This command sets the region to the matched text and activates
          the region.

   forward-search-history (C-s)
          Search forward starting at the current line and moving 'down' through the history as
          necessary. This is an incremental search. This command sets the region to the matched text and
          activates the region.

   non-incremental-reverse-search-history (M-p)
          Search backward starting at the current line and moving 'up' through the history as necessary
          using a non-incremental search for a string supplied by the user. The search string may match
          anywhere in a history line.

   non-incremental-forward-search-history (M-n)
          Search forward starting at the current line and moving 'down' through the history as necessary
          using a non-incremental search for a string supplied by the user. The search string may match
          anywhere in a history line.

   history-search-backward ()
          Search backward through the history for the string of characters between the start of the
          current line and the point. The search string must match at the beginning of a history line.
          This is a non-incremental search. By default, this command is unbound, but may be bound to the
          Page Down key on some keyboards.

   history-search-forward ()
          Search forward through the history for the string of characters between the start of the
          current line and the point. The search string must match at the beginning of a history line.
          This is a non-incremental search. By default, this command is unbound, but may be bound to the
          Page Up key on some keyboards.

   history-substring-search-backward ()
          Search backward through the history for the string of characters between the start of the
          current line and the point. The search string may match anywhere in a history line. This is a
          non-incremental search. By default, this command is unbound.

   history-substring-search-forward ()
          Search forward through the history for the string of characters between the start of the
          current line and the point. The search string may match anywhere in a history line. This is a
          non-incremental search. By default, this command is unbound.

   yank-nth-arg (M-C-y)
          Insert the first argument to the previous command (usually the second word on the previous
          line) at point. With an argument n, insert the nth word from the previous command (the words
          in the previous command begin with word 0). A negative argument inserts the nth word from the
          end of the previous command. Once the argument n is computed, this uses the history expansion
          facilities to extract the nth word, as if the '!n' history expansion had been specified.

   yank-last-arg (M-. or M-_)
          Insert last argument to the previous command (the last word of the previous history entry).
          With a numeric argument, behave exactly like yank-nth-arg. Successive calls to yank-last-arg
          move back through the history list, inserting the last word (or the word specified by the
          argument to the first call) of each line in turn. Any numeric argument supplied to these
          successive calls determines the direction to move through the history. A negative argument
          switches the direction through the history (back or forward). This uses the history expansion
          facilities to extract the last word, as if the '!$' history expansion had been specified.

   operate-and-get-next (C-o)
          Accept the current line for return to the calling application as if a newline had been
          entered, and fetch the next line relative to the current line from the history for editing. A
          numeric argument, if supplied, specifies the history entry to use instead of the current line.

   fetch-history ()
          With a numeric argument, fetch that entry from the history list and make it the current line.
          Without an argument, move back to the first entry in the history list.

1.4.3 Commands For Changing Text
   end-of-file (usually C-d)
          The character indicating end-of-file as set, for example, by stty. If this character is read
          when there are no characters on the line, and point is at the beginning of the line, Readline
          interprets it as the end of input and returns EOF.

   delete-char (C-d)
          Delete the character at point. If this function is bound to the same character as the tty EOF
          character, as C-d commonly is, see above for the effects. This may also be bound to the Delete
          key on some keyboards.

   backward-delete-char (Rubout)
          Delete the character behind the cursor. A numeric argument means to kill the characters,
          saving them on the kill ring, instead of deleting them.

   forward-backward-delete-char ()
          Delete the character under the cursor, unless the cursor is at the end of the line, in which
          case the character behind the cursor is deleted. By default, this is not bound to a key.

   quoted-insert (C-q or C-v)
          Add the next character typed to the line verbatim. This is how to insert key sequences like
          C-q, for example.

   tab-insert (M-TAB)
          Insert a tab character.

   self-insert (a, b, A, 1, !, ...)
          Insert the character typed.

   bracketed-paste-begin ()
          This function is intended to be bound to the "bracketed paste" escape sequence sent by some
          terminals, and such a binding is assigned by default. It allows Readline to insert the pasted
          text as a single unit without treating each character as if it had been read from the
          keyboard. The characters are inserted as if each one was bound to self-insert instead of
          executing any editing commands.

          Bracketed paste sets the region (the characters between point and the mark) to the inserted
          text. It sets the active region.

   transpose-chars (C-t)
          Drag the character before the cursor forward over the character at the cursor, moving the
          cursor forward as well. If the insertion point is at the end of the line, then this transposes
          the last two characters of the line. Negative arguments have no effect.

   transpose-words (M-t)
          Drag the word before point past the word after point, moving point past that word as well. If
          the insertion point is at the end of the line, this transposes the last two words on the line.

   upcase-word (M-u)
          Uppercase the current (or following) word. With a negative argument, uppercase the previous
          word, but do not move the cursor.

   downcase-word (M-l)
          Lowercase the current (or following) word. With a negative argument, lowercase the previous
          word, but do not move the cursor.

   capitalize-word (M-c)
          Capitalize the current (or following) word. With a negative argument, capitalize the previous
          word, but do not move the cursor.

   overwrite-mode ()
          Toggle overwrite mode. With an explicit positive numeric argument, switches to overwrite mode.
          With an explicit non-positive numeric argument, switches to insert mode. This command affects
          only emacs mode; vi mode does overwrite differently. Each call to readline() starts in insert
          mode.

          In overwrite mode, characters bound to self-insert replace the text at point rather than
          pushing the text to the right. Characters bound to backward-delete-char replace the character
          before point with a space.

          By default, this command is unbound, but may be bound to the Insert key on some keyboards.

1.4.4 Killing And Yanking
   kill-line (C-k)
          Kill the text from point to the end of the current line. With a negative numeric argument,
          kill backward from the cursor to the beginning of the line.

   backward-kill-line (C-x Rubout)
          Kill backward from the cursor to the beginning of the current line. With a negative numeric
          argument, kill forward from the cursor to the end of the line.

   unix-line-discard (C-u)
          Kill backward from the cursor to the beginning of the current line.

   kill-whole-line ()
          Kill all characters on the current line, no matter where point is. By default, this is
          unbound.

   kill-word (M-d)
          Kill from point to the end of the current word, or if between words, to the end of the next
          word. Word boundaries are the same as forward-word.

   backward-kill-word (M-DEL)
          Kill the word behind point. Word boundaries are the same as backward-word.

   unix-word-rubout (C-w)
          Kill the word behind point, using white space as a word boundary, saving the killed text on
          the kill-ring.

   unix-filename-rubout ()
          Kill the word behind point, using white space and the slash character as the word boundaries,
          saving the killed text on the kill-ring.

   delete-horizontal-space ()
          Delete all spaces and tabs around point. By default, this is unbound.

   kill-region ()
          Kill the text in the current region. By default, this command is unbound.

   copy-region-as-kill ()
          Copy the text in the region to the kill buffer, so it can be yanked right away. By default,
          this command is unbound.

   copy-backward-word ()
          Copy the word before point to the kill buffer. The word boundaries are the same as
          backward-word. By default, this command is unbound.

   copy-forward-word ()
          Copy the word following point to the kill buffer. The word boundaries are the same as
          forward-word. By default, this command is unbound.

   yank (C-y)
          Yank the top of the kill ring into the buffer at point.

   yank-pop (M-y)
          Rotate the kill-ring, and yank the new top. You can only do this if the prior command is yank
          or yank-pop.

1.4.5 Specifying Numeric Arguments
   digit-argument (M-0, M-1, ... M--)
          Add this digit to the argument already accumulating, or start a new argument. M-- starts a
          negative argument.

   universal-argument ()
          This is another way to specify an argument. If this command is followed by one or more digits,
          optionally with a leading minus sign, those digits define the argument. If the command is
          followed by digits, executing universal-argument again ends the numeric argument, but is
          otherwise ignored. As a special case, if this command is immediately followed by a character
          that is neither a digit nor minus sign, the argument count for the next command is multiplied
          by four. The argument count is initially one, so executing this function the first time makes
          the argument count four, a second time makes the argument count sixteen, and so on. By
          default, this is not bound to a key.

1.4.6 Letting Readline Type For You
   complete (TAB)
          Attempt to perform completion on the text before point. The actual completion performed is
          application-specific. The default is filename completion.

   possible-completions (M-?)
          List the possible completions of the text before point. When displaying completions, Readline
          sets the number of columns used for display to the value of completion-display-width, the
          value of the environment variable COLUMNS, or the screen width, in that order.

   insert-completions (M-*)
          Insert all completions of the text before point that would have been generated by
          possible-completions, separated by a space.

   menu-complete ()
          Similar to complete, but replaces the word to be completed with a single match from the list
          of possible completions. Repeatedly executing menu-complete steps through the list of possible
          completions, inserting each match in turn. At the end of the list of completions,
          menu-complete rings the bell (subject to the setting of bell-style) and restores the original
          text. An argument of n moves n positions forward in the list of matches; a negative argument
          moves backward through the list. This command is intended to be bound to TAB, but is unbound
          by default.

   menu-complete-backward ()
          Identical to menu-complete, but moves backward through the list of possible completions, as if
          menu-complete had been given a negative argument. This command is unbound by default.

   export-completions ()
          Perform completion on the word before point as described above and write the list of possible
          completions to Readline´s output stream using the following format, writing information on
          separate lines:

          + the number of matches N;
          + the word being completed;
          + S:E, where S and E are the start and end offsets of the word in the Readline line buffer;
            then
          + each match, one per line

          If there are no matches, the first line will be "0", and this command does not print any
          output after the S:E. If there is only a single match, this prints a single line containing
          it. If there is more than one match, this prints the common prefix of the matches, which may
          be empty, on the first line after the S:E, then the matches on subsequent lines. In this case,
          N will include the first line with the common prefix.

          The user or application should be able to accommodate the possibility of a blank line. The
          intent is that the user or application reads N lines after the line containing S:E to obtain
          the match list. This command is unbound by default.

   delete-char-or-list ()
          Deletes the character under the cursor if not at the beginning or end of the line (like
          delete-char). At the end of the line, it behaves identically to possible-completions. This
          command is unbound by default.

1.4.7 Keyboard Macros
   start-kbd-macro (C-x ()
          Begin saving the characters typed into the current keyboard macro.

   end-kbd-macro (C-x ))
          Stop saving the characters typed into the current keyboard macro and save the definition.

   call-last-kbd-macro (C-x e)
          Re-execute the last keyboard macro defined, by making the characters in the macro appear as if
          typed at the keyboard.

   print-last-kbd-macro ()
          Print the last keyboard macro defined in a format suitable for the inputrc file.

1.4.8 Some Miscellaneous Commands
   re-read-init-file (C-x C-r)
          Read in the contents of the inputrc file, and incorporate any bindings or variable assignments
          found there.

   abort (C-g)
          Abort the current editing command and ring the terminal´s bell (subject to the setting of
          bell-style).

   do-lowercase-version (M-A, M-B, M-x, ...)
          If the metafied character x is upper case, run the command that is bound to the corresponding
          metafied lower case character. The behavior is undefined if x is already lower case.

   prefix-meta (ESC)
          Metafy the next character typed. Typing 'ESC f' is equivalent to typing M-f.

   undo (C-_ or C-x C-u)
          Incremental undo, separately remembered for each line.

   revert-line (M-r)
          Undo all changes made to this line. This is like executing the undo command enough times to
          get back to the initial state.

   tilde-expand (M-~)
          Perform tilde expansion on the current word.

   set-mark (C-@)
          Set the mark to the point. If a numeric argument is supplied, set the mark to that position.

   exchange-point-and-mark (C-x C-x)
          Swap the point with the mark. Set the current cursor position to the saved position, then set
          the mark to the old cursor position.

   character-search (C-])
          Read a character and move point to the next occurrence of that character. A negative argument
          searches for previous occurrences.

   character-search-backward (M-C-])
          Read a character and move point to the previous occurrence of that character. A negative
          argument searches for subsequent occurrences.

   skip-csi-sequence ()
          Read enough characters to consume a multi-key sequence such as those defined for keys like
          Home and End. CSI sequences begin with a Control Sequence Indicator (CSI), usually ESC [. If
          this sequence is bound to "\e[", keys producing CSI sequences have no effect unless explicitly
          bound to a Readline command, instead of inserting stray characters into the editing buffer.
          This is unbound by default, but usually bound to ESC [.

   insert-comment (M-#)
          Without a numeric argument, insert the value of the comment-begin variable at the beginning of
          the current line. If a numeric argument is supplied, this command acts as a toggle: if the
          characters at the beginning of the line do not match the value of comment-begin, insert the
          value; otherwise delete the characters in comment-begin from the beginning of the line. In
          either case, the line is accepted as if a newline had been typed.

   dump-functions ()
          Print all of the functions and their key bindings to the Readline output stream. If a numeric
          argument is supplied, the output is formatted in such a way that it can be made part of an
          inputrc file. This command is unbound by default.

   dump-variables ()
          Print all of the settable variables and their values to the Readline output stream. If a
          numeric argument is supplied, the output is formatted in such a way that it can be made part
          of an inputrc file. This command is unbound by default.

   dump-macros ()
          Print all of the Readline key sequences bound to macros and the strings they output to the
          Readline output stream. If a numeric argument is supplied, the output is formatted in such a
          way that it can be made part of an inputrc file. This command is unbound by default.

   execute-named-command (M-x)
          Read a bindable Readline command name from the input and execute the function to which it´s
          bound, as if the key sequence to which it was bound appeared in the input. If this function is
          supplied with a numeric argument, it passes that argument to the function it executes.

   emacs-editing-mode (C-e)
          When in vi command mode, this causes a switch to emacs editing mode.

   vi-editing-mode (M-C-j)
          When in emacs editing mode, this causes a switch to vi editing mode.

1.5 Readline vi Mode
   While the Readline library does not have a full set of vi editing functions, it does contain enough
   to allow simple editing of the line. The Readline vi mode behaves as specified in the sh description
   in the POSIX standard.

   In order to switch interactively between emacs and vi editing modes, use the command M-C-j (bound to
   emacs-editing-mode when in vi mode and to vi-editing-mode in emacs mode). The Readline default is
   emacs mode.

   When you enter a line in vi mode, you are already placed in 'insertion' mode, as if you had typed an
   'i'. Pressing ESC switches you into 'command' mode, where you can edit the text of the line with the
   standard vi movement keys, move to previous history lines with 'k' and subsequent lines with 'j', and
   so forth.

2 Programming with GNU Readline
   This chapter describes the interface between the GNU Readline Library and other programs. If you are
   a programmer, and you wish to include the features found in GNU Readline such as completion, line
   editing, and interactive history manipulation in your own programs, this section is for you.
     * Basic Behavior
     * Custom Functions
     * Readline Variables
     * Readline Convenience Functions
     * Readline Signal Handling
     * Custom Completers

2.1 Basic Behavior
   Many programs provide a command line interface, such as mail, ftp, and sh. For such programs, the
   default behavior of Readline is sufficient. This section describes how to use Readline in the
   simplest way possible, perhaps to replace calls in your code to fgets().

   The function readline() prints a prompt prompt and then reads and returns a single line of text from
   the user. Since it´s possible to enter characters into the line while quoting them to disable any
   Readline editing function they might normally have, this line may include embedded newlines and other
   special characters. If prompt is NULL or the empty string, readline() does not display a prompt. The
   line readline() returns is allocated with malloc(); the caller should free() the line when it has
   finished with it. The declaration for readline in ANSI C is
char *readline (const char *prompt);

   So, one might say
char *line = readline ("Enter a line: ");

   in order to read a line of text from the user. The line returned has the final newline removed, so
   only the text remains. This means that lines consisting of a newline return the empty string.

   If Readline encounters an EOF while reading the line, and the line is empty at that point, then
   readline() returns (char *)NULL. Otherwise, the line is ended just as if a newline had been typed.

   Readline performs some expansion on the prompt before it is displayed on the screen. See the
   description of rl_expand_prompt (see Redisplay) for additional details, especially if prompt
   will contain characters that do not consume physical screen space when displayed.

   If you want the user to be able to get at the line later, (with C-p for example), you must call
   add_history() to save the line away in a history list of such lines.
add_history (line);

   For full details on the GNU History Library, see the associated manual.

   It is preferable to avoid saving empty lines on the history list, since users rarely have a burning
   need to reuse a blank line. Here is a function which usefully replaces the standard gets() library
   function, and has the advantage of no static buffer to overflow:
/* A static variable for holding the line. */
static char *line_read = (char *)NULL;

/* Read a string, and return a pointer to it.
   Returns NULL on EOF. */
char *rl_gets () {
	/* If the buffer has already been allocated,
		 return the memory to the free pool. */
	if (line_read)
		{
			free (line_read);
			line_read = (char *)NULL;
		}

	/* Get a line from the user. */
	line_read = readline ("");

	/* If the line has any text in it,
		 save it on the history. */
	if (line_read && *line_read)
		add_history (line_read);

	return (line_read);
}

   This function gives the user the default behavior of TAB completion: filename completion. If you do
   not want Readline to complete filenames, you can change the binding of the TAB key with
   rl_bind_key().
int rl_bind_key (int key, rl_command_func_t *function);

   rl_bind_key() takes two arguments: key is the character that you want to bind, and function is the
   address of the function to call when key is pressed. Binding TAB to rl_insert() makes TAB insert
   itself. rl_bind_key() returns non-zero if key is not a valid ASCII character code (between 0 and
   255).

   Thus, to disable the default TAB behavior, the following suffices:
rl_bind_key ('\t', rl_insert);

   This code should be executed once at the start of your program; you might write a function called
   initialize_readline() which performs this and other desired initializations, such as installing
   custom completers (see Custom Completers).

2.2 Custom Functions
   Readline provides many functions for manipulating the text of the line, but it isn´t possible to
   anticipate the needs of all programs. This section describes the various functions and variables
   defined within the Readline library which allow a program to add customized functionality to
   Readline.

   Before declaring any functions that customize Readline´s behavior, or using any functionality
   Readline provides in other code, an application writer should include the file <readline/readline.h>
   in any file that uses Readline´s features. Since some of the definitions in readline.h use the stdio
   library, the program should include the file <stdio.h> before readline.h.

   readline.h defines a C preprocessor variable that should be treated as an integer,
   RL_READLINE_VERSION, which may be used to conditionally compile application code depending on the
   installed Readline version. The value is a hexadecimal encoding of the major and minor version
   numbers of the library, of the form 0xMMmm. MM is the two-digit major version number; mm is the
   two-digit minor version number. For Readline 4.2, for example, the value of RL_READLINE_VERSION would
   be 0x0402.
     * Readline Typedefs
     * Writing a New Function

2.2.1 Readline Typedefs
   For readability, we declare a number of new object types, all pointers to functions.

   The reason for declaring these new types is to make it easier to write code describing pointers to C
   functions with appropriately prototyped arguments and return values.

   For instance, say we want to declare a variable func as a pointer to a function which takes two int
   arguments and returns an int (this is the type of all of the Readline bindable functions). Instead of
   the classic C declaration
   int (*func)();

   or the ANSI-C style declaration
   int (*func)(int, int);

   we may write
   rl_command_func_t *func;

   The full list of function pointer types available is

   typedef int rl_command_func_t (int, int);
   typedef char *rl_compentry_func_t (const char *, int);
   typedef char **rl_completion_func_t (const char *, int, int);
   typedef char *rl_quote_func_t (char *, int, char *);
   typedef char *rl_dequote_func_t (char *, int);
   typedef int rl_compignore_func_t (char **);
   typedef void rl_compdisp_func_t (char **, int, int);
   typedef void rl_macro_print_func_t (const char *, const char *, int, const char *);
   typedef int rl_hook_func_t (void);
   typedef int rl_getc_func_t (FILE *);
   typedef int rl_linebuf_func_t (char *, int);
   typedef int rl_intfunc_t (int);
   #define rl_ivoidfunc_t rl_hook_func_t
   typedef int rl_icpfunc_t (char *);
   typedef int rl_icppfunc_t (char **);
   typedef void rl_voidfunc_t (void);
   typedef void rl_vintfunc_t (int);
   typedef void rl_vcpfunc_t (char *);
   typedef void rl_vcppfunc_t (char **);

   The rltypedefs.h file has more documentation for these types.

2.2.2 Writing a New Function
   In order to write new functions for Readline, you need to know the calling conventions for
   keyboard-invoked functions, and the names of the variables that describe the current state of the
   line read so far.

   The calling sequence for a command foo looks like
int foo (int count, int key)

   where count is the numeric argument (or 1 if defaulted) and key is the key that invoked this
   function.

   It is completely up to the function as to what should be done with the numeric argument. Some
   functions use it as a repeat count, some as a flag, and others to choose alternate behavior
   (refreshing the current line as opposed to refreshing the screen, for example). Some choose to ignore
   it. In general, if a function uses the numeric argument as a repeat count, it should be able to do
   something useful with both negative and positive arguments. At the very least, it should be aware
   that it can be passed a negative argument.

   A command function should return 0 if its action completes successfully, and a value greater than
   zero if some error occurs. All of the builtin Readline bindable command functions obey this
   convention.

2.3 Readline Variables
   These variables are available to function writers.

   Variable: char * rl_line_buffer
          This is the line gathered so far. You are welcome to modify the contents of the line, but see
          Allowing Undoing. The function rl_extend_line_buffer will increase the memory allocated
          to rl_line_buffer.

   Variable: int rl_point
          The offset of the current cursor position in rl_line_buffer (the point).

   Variable: int rl_end
          The number of characters present in rl_line_buffer. When rl_point is at the end of the line,
          rl_point and rl_end are equal.

   Variable: int rl_mark
          The mark (saved position) in the current line. If set, the mark and point define a region.
          Some Readline commands set the mark as part of operating; users can also set the mark
          explicitly.

   Variable: int rl_done
          Setting this to a non-zero value causes Readline to return the current line immediately.
          Readline will set this variable when it has read a key sequence bound to accept-line and is
          about to return the line to the caller.

   Variable: int rl_eof_found
          Readline will set this variable when it has read an EOF character (e.g., the stty 'EOF'
          character) on an empty line or has encountered a read error or EOF and is about to return a
          NULL line to the caller.

   Variable: int rl_num_chars_to_read
          Setting this to a positive value before calling readline() causes Readline to return after
          accepting that many characters, rather than reading up to a character bound to accept-line.

   Variable: int rl_pending_input
          Setting this to a value makes it the next keystroke read. This is a way to stuff a single
          character into the input stream.

   Variable: int rl_dispatching
          Set to a non-zero value if a function is being called from a key binding; zero otherwise.
          Application functions can test this to discover whether they were called directly or by
          Readline´s dispatching mechanism.

   Variable: int rl_erase_empty_line
          Setting this to a non-zero value causes Readline to completely erase the current line,
          including any prompt, any time a newline is typed as the only character on an otherwise-empty
          line. This moves the cursor to the beginning of the newly-blank line.

   Variable: char * rl_prompt
          The prompt Readline uses. This is set from the argument to readline(), and should not be
          assigned to directly. The rl_set_prompt() function (see Redisplay) may be used to modify
          the prompt string after calling readline(). Readline performs some prompt expansions and
          analyzes the prompt for line breaks, so rl_set_prompt() is preferred.

   Variable: char * rl_display_prompt
          The string displayed as the prompt. This is usually identical to rl_prompt, but may be changed
          temporarily by functions that use the prompt string as a message area, such as incremental
          search.

   Variable: int rl_already_prompted
          If an application wishes to display the prompt itself, rather than have Readline do it the
          first time readline() is called, it should set this variable to a non-zero value after
          displaying the prompt. The prompt must also be passed as the argument to readline() so the
          redisplay functions can update the display properly. The calling application is responsible
          for managing the value; Readline never sets it.

   Variable: const char * rl_library_version
          The version number of this revision of the Readline library, as a string (e.g., "4.2").

   Variable: int rl_readline_version
          An integer encoding the current version of the library. The encoding is of the form 0xMMmm,
          where MM is the two-digit major version number, and mm is the two-digit minor version number.
          For example, for Readline-4.2, rl_readline_version would have the value 0x0402.

   Variable: int rl_gnu_readline_p
          Always set to 1, denoting that this is GNU Readline rather than some emulation.

   Variable: const char * rl_terminal_name
          The terminal type, used for initialization. If not set by the application, Readline sets this
          to the value of the TERM environment variable the first time it is called. Readline uses this
          to look up the terminal capabilities it needs in the terminfo database.

   Variable: const char * rl_readline_name
          This variable is set to a unique name by each application using Readline. The value allows
          conditional parsing of the inputrc file (see Conditional Init Constructs).

   Variable: FILE * rl_instream
          The stdio stream from which Readline reads input. If NULL, Readline defaults to stdin.

   Variable: FILE * rl_outstream
          The stdio stream to which Readline performs output. If NULL, Readline defaults to stdout.

   Variable: int rl_prefer_env_winsize
          If non-zero, Readline gives values found in the LINES and COLUMNS environment variables
          greater precedence than values fetched from the kernel when computing the screen dimensions.

   Variable: rl_command_func_t * rl_last_func
          The address of the last command function Readline executed. This may be used to test whether
          or not a function is being executed twice in succession, for example.

   Variable: rl_hook_func_t * rl_startup_hook
          If non-zero, this is the address of a function to call just before Readline prints the first
          prompt.

   Variable: rl_hook_func_t * rl_pre_input_hook
          If non-zero, this is the address of a function to call after the first prompt has been printed
          and just before Readline starts reading input characters.

   Variable: rl_hook_func_t * rl_event_hook
          If non-zero, this is the address of a function to call periodically when Readline is waiting
          for terminal input. By default, this will be called at most ten times a second if there is no
          keyboard input.

   Variable: rl_getc_func_t * rl_getc_function
          If non-zero, Readline will call indirectly through this pointer to get a character from the
          input stream. By default, it is set to rl_getc, the Readline character input function (see
          Character Input). In general, an application that sets rl_getc_function should consider
          setting rl_input_available_hook as well.

   Variable: rl_hook_func_t * rl_signal_event_hook
          If non-zero, this is the address of a function to call if a read system call is interrupted by
          a signal when Readline is reading terminal input.

   Variable: rl_hook_func_t * rl_timeout_event_hook
          If non-zero, this is the address of a function to call if Readline times out while reading
          input.

   Variable: rl_hook_func_t * rl_input_available_hook
          If non-zero, Readline will use this function´s return value when it needs to determine whether
          or not there is available input on the current input source. The default hook checks
          rl_instream; if an application is using a different input source, it should set the hook
          appropriately. Readline queries for available input when implementing intra-key-sequence
          timeouts during input and incremental searches. This function must return zero if there is no
          input available, and non-zero if input is available. This may use an application-specific
          timeout before returning a value; Readline uses the value passed to
          rl_set_keyboard_input_timeout() or the value of the user-settable keyseq-timeout variable.
          This is designed for use by applications using Readline´s callback interface (see
          Alternate Interface), which may not use the traditional read(2) and file descriptor
          interface, or other applications using a different input mechanism. If an application uses an
          input mechanism or hook that can potentially exceed the value of keyseq-timeout, it should
          increase the timeout or set this hook appropriately even when not using the callback
          interface. In general, an application that sets rl_getc_function should consider setting
          rl_input_available_hook as well.

   Variable: rl_voidfunc_t * rl_redisplay_function
          Readline will call indirectly through this pointer to update the display with the current
          contents of the editing buffer. By default, it is set to rl_redisplay, the default Readline
          redisplay function (see Redisplay).

   Variable: rl_vintfunc_t * rl_prep_term_function
          If non-zero, Readline will call indirectly through this pointer to initialize the terminal.
          The function takes a single argument, an int flag that says whether or not to use eight-bit
          characters. By default, this is set to rl_prep_terminal (see Terminal Management).

   Variable: rl_voidfunc_t * rl_deprep_term_function
          If non-zero, Readline will call indirectly through this pointer to reset the terminal. This
          function should undo the effects of rl_prep_term_function. By default, this is set to
          rl_deprep_terminal (see Terminal Management).

   Variable: void rl_macro_display_hook
          If set, this points to a function that rl_macro_dumper will call to display a key sequence
          bound to a macro. It is called with the key sequence, the "untranslated" macro value (i.e.,
          with backslash escapes included, as when passed to rl_macro_bind), the readable argument
          passed to rl_macro_dumper, and any prefix to display before the key sequence.

   Variable: Keymap rl_executing_keymap
          This variable is set to the keymap (see Selecting a Keymap) in which the currently
          executing Readline function was found.

   Variable: Keymap rl_binding_keymap
          This variable is set to the keymap (see Selecting a Keymap) in which the last key binding
          occurred.

   Variable: char * rl_executing_macro
          This variable is set to the text of any currently-executing macro.

   Variable: int rl_executing_key
          The key that caused the dispatch to the currently-executing Readline function.

   Variable: char * rl_executing_keyseq
          The full key sequence that caused the dispatch to the currently-executing Readline function.

   Variable: int rl_key_sequence_length
          The number of characters in rl_executing_keyseq.

   Variable: int rl_readline_state
          A variable with bit values that encapsulate the current Readline state. A bit is set with the
          RL_SETSTATE macro, and unset with the RL_UNSETSTATE macro. Use the RL_ISSTATE macro to test
          whether a particular state bit is set. Current state bits include:

        RL_STATE_NONE
                Readline has not yet been called, nor has it begun to initialize.

        RL_STATE_INITIALIZING
                Readline is initializing its internal data structures.

        RL_STATE_INITIALIZED
                Readline has completed its initialization.

        RL_STATE_TERMPREPPED
                Readline has modified the terminal modes to do its own input and redisplay.

        RL_STATE_READCMD
                Readline is reading a command from the keyboard.

        RL_STATE_METANEXT
                Readline is reading more input after reading the meta-prefix character.

        RL_STATE_DISPATCHING
                Readline is dispatching to a command.

        RL_STATE_MOREINPUT
                Readline is reading more input while executing an editing command.

        RL_STATE_ISEARCH
                Readline is performing an incremental history search.

        RL_STATE_NSEARCH
                Readline is performing a non-incremental history search.

        RL_STATE_SEARCH
                Readline is searching backward or forward through the history for a string.

        RL_STATE_NUMERICARG
                Readline is reading a numeric argument.

        RL_STATE_MACROINPUT
                Readline is currently getting its input from a previously-defined keyboard macro.

        RL_STATE_MACRODEF
                Readline is currently reading characters defining a keyboard macro.

        RL_STATE_OVERWRITE
                Readline is in overwrite mode.

        RL_STATE_COMPLETING
                Readline is performing word completion.

        RL_STATE_SIGHANDLER
                Readline is currently executing the Readline signal handler.

        RL_STATE_UNDOING
                Readline is performing an undo.

        RL_STATE_INPUTPENDING
                Readline has input pending due to a call to rl_execute_next().

        RL_STATE_TTYCSAVED
                Readline has saved the values of the terminal´s special characters.

        RL_STATE_CALLBACK
                Readline is currently using the alternate (callback) interface (see Alternate
                Interface).

        RL_STATE_VIMOTION
                Readline is reading the argument to a vi-mode "motion" command.

        RL_STATE_MULTIKEY
                Readline is reading a multiple-keystroke command.

        RL_STATE_VICMDONCE
                Readline has entered vi command (movement) mode at least one time during the current
                call to readline().

        RL_STATE_DONE
                Readline has read a key sequence bound to accept-line and is about to return the line to
                the caller.

        RL_STATE_TIMEOUT
                Readline has timed out (it did not receive a line or specified number of characters
                before the timeout duration specified by rl_set_timeout elapsed) and is returning that
                status to the caller.

        RL_STATE_EOF
                Readline has read an EOF character (e.g., the stty 'EOF' character) or encountered a
                read error or EOF and is about to return a NULL line to the caller.

   Variable: int rl_explicit_arg
          Set to a non-zero value if an explicit numeric argument was specified by the user. It is only
          valid in a bindable command function.

   Variable: int rl_numeric_arg
          Set to the value of any numeric argument explicitly specified by the user before executing the
          current Readline function. It is only valid in a bindable command function.

   Variable: int rl_editing_mode
          Set to a value denoting Readline´s current editing mode. A value of 1 means Readline is
          currently in emacs mode; 0 means that vi mode is active. This determines the current keymap
          and key bindings.

2.4 Readline Convenience Functions
     * Naming a Function
     * Selecting a Keymap
     * Binding Keys
     * Associating Function Names and Bindings
     * Allowing Undoing
     * Redisplay
     * Modifying Text
     * Character Input
     * Terminal Management
     * Utility Functions
     * Miscellaneous Functions
     * Alternate Interface
     * A Readline Example
     * Alternate Interface Example

2.4.1 Naming a Function
   Readline has a descriptive string name for every function a user can bind to a key sequence, so users
   can dynamically change the bindings associated with key sequences while using Readline, using the
   descriptive name when referring to the function. Thus, in an init file, one might find
Meta-Rubout:    backward-kill-word

   This binds the keystroke Meta-Rubout to the function descriptively named backward-kill-word. As the
   programmer, you should bind the functions you write to descriptive names as well. Readline provides a
   function for doing that:

   Function: int rl_add_defun (const char *name, rl_command_func_t *function, int key)
          Add name to the list of named functions. Make function be the function that gets called by key
          sequences that bind to name. If key is not -1, then bind it to function using rl_bind_key().

   Using this function alone is sufficient for most applications. It is the recommended way to add a few
   functions to the default functions that Readline has built in. If you need to do something other than
   adding a function to Readline, you may need to use the underlying functions described below.

2.4.2 Selecting a Keymap
   Key bindings take place on a keymap. The keymap is the association between the keys that the user
   types and the functions that get run. You can make your own keymaps, copy existing keymaps, and tell
   Readline which keymap to use.

   Function: Keymap rl_make_bare_keymap (void)
          Returns a new, empty keymap. The space for the keymap is allocated with malloc(); the caller
          should free it by calling rl_free_keymap() when done.

   Function: Keymap rl_copy_keymap (Keymap map)
          Return a new keymap which is a copy of map.

   Function: Keymap rl_make_keymap (void)
          Return a new keymap with the printing characters bound to rl_insert, the lowercase Meta
          characters bound to run their equivalents, and the Meta digits bound to produce numeric
          arguments.

   Function: void rl_discard_keymap (Keymap keymap)
          Free the storage associated with the data in keymap. The caller should free keymap.

   Function: void rl_free_keymap (Keymap keymap)
          Free all storage associated with keymap. This calls rl_discard_keymap to free subordinate
          keymaps and macros.

   Function: int rl_empty_keymap (Keymap keymap)
          Return non-zero if there are no keys bound to functions in keymap; zero if there are any keys
          bound.

   Readline has several internal keymaps. These functions allow you to change which keymap is active.
   This is one way to switch editing modes, for example.

   Function: Keymap rl_get_keymap (void)
          Returns the currently active keymap.

   Function: void rl_set_keymap (Keymap keymap)
          Makes keymap the currently active keymap.

   Function: Keymap rl_get_keymap_by_name (const char *name)
          Return the keymap matching name. name is one which would be supplied in a set keymap inputrc
          line (see Readline Init File).

   Function: char * rl_get_keymap_name (Keymap keymap)
          Return the name matching keymap. name is one which would be supplied in a set keymap inputrc
          line (see Readline Init File).

   Function: int rl_set_keymap_name (const char *name, Keymap keymap)
          Set the name of keymap. This name will then be "registered" and available for use in a set
          keymap inputrc directive see Readline Init File). The name may not be one of Readline´s
          builtin keymap names; you may not add a different name for one of Readline´s builtin keymaps.
          You may replace the name associated with a given keymap by calling this function more than
          once with the same keymap argument. You may associate a registered name with a new keymap by
          calling this function more than once with the same name argument. There is no way to remove a
          named keymap once the name has been registered. Readline will make a copy of name. The return
          value is greater than zero unless name is one of Readline´s builtin keymap names or keymap is
          one of Readline´s builtin keymaps.

2.4.3 Binding Keys
   Key sequences are associated with functions through the keymap. Readline has several internal
   keymaps: emacs_standard_keymap, emacs_meta_keymap, emacs_ctlx_keymap, vi_movement_keymap, and
   vi_insertion_keymap. emacs_standard_keymap is the default, and the examples in this manual assume
   that.

   Since readline() installs a set of default key bindings the first time it is called, there is always
   the danger that a custom binding installed before the first call to readline() will be overridden. An
   alternate mechanism that can avoid this is to install custom key bindings in an initialization
   function assigned to the rl_startup_hook variable (see Readline Variables).

   These functions manage key bindings.

   Function: int rl_bind_key (int key, rl_command_func_t *function)
          Binds key to function in the currently active keymap. Returns non-zero in the case of an
          invalid key.

   Function: int rl_bind_key_in_map (int key, rl_command_func_t *function, Keymap map)
          Bind key to function in map. Returns non-zero in the case of an invalid key.

   Function: int rl_bind_key_if_unbound (int key, rl_command_func_t *function)
          Binds key to function if it is not already bound in the currently active keymap. Returns
          non-zero in the case of an invalid key or if key is already bound.

   Function: int rl_bind_key_if_unbound_in_map (int key, rl_command_func_t *function, Keymap map)
          Binds key to function if it is not already bound in map. Returns non-zero in the case of an
          invalid key or if key is already bound.

   Function: int rl_unbind_key (int key)
          Bind key to the null function in the currently active keymap. This is not the same as binding
          it to self-insert. Returns non-zero in case of error.

   Function: int rl_unbind_key_in_map (int key, Keymap map)
          Bind key to the null function in map. This is not the same as binding it to self-insert.
          Returns non-zero in case of error.

   Function: int rl_unbind_function_in_map (rl_command_func_t *function, Keymap map)
          Unbind all keys that execute function in map.

   Function: int rl_unbind_command_in_map (const char *command, Keymap map)
          Unbind all keys that are bound to command in map.

   Function: int rl_bind_keyseq (const char *keyseq, rl_command_func_t *function)
          Bind the key sequence represented by the string keyseq to the function function, beginning in
          the current keymap. This makes new keymaps as necessary. The return value is non-zero if
          keyseq is invalid.

   Function: int rl_bind_keyseq_in_map (const char *keyseq, rl_command_func_t *function, Keymap
          map)
          Bind the key sequence represented by the string keyseq to the function function in map. This
          makes new keymaps as necessary. Initial bindings are performed in map. The return value is
          non-zero if keyseq is invalid.

   Function: int rl_set_key (const char *keyseq, rl_command_func_t *function, Keymap map)
          Equivalent to rl_bind_keyseq_in_map.

   Function: int rl_bind_keyseq_if_unbound (const char *keyseq, rl_command_func_t *function)
          Binds keyseq to function if it is not already bound in the currently active keymap. Returns
          non-zero in the case of an invalid keyseq or if keyseq is already bound.

   Function: int rl_bind_keyseq_if_unbound_in_map (const char *keyseq, rl_command_func_t *function,
          Keymap map)
          Binds keyseq to function if it is not already bound in map. Returns non-zero in the case of an
          invalid keyseq or if keyseq is already bound.

   Function: int rl_generic_bind (int type, const char *keyseq, char *data, Keymap map)
          Bind the key sequence represented by the string keyseq to the arbitrary pointer data. type
          says what kind of data is pointed to by data; this can be a function (ISFUNC), a macro
          (ISMACR), or a keymap (ISKMAP). This makes new keymaps as necessary. The initial keymap in
          which to do bindings is map. Returns non-zero in the case of an invalid keyseq, zero
          otherwise.

   Function: int rl_parse_and_bind (char *line)
          Parse line as if it had been read from the inputrc file and perform any key bindings and
          variable assignments found (see Readline Init File).

   Function: int rl_read_init_file (const char *filename)
          Read keybindings and variable assignments from filename (see Readline Init File).

2.4.4 Associating Function Names and Bindings
   These functions allow you to find out what keys invoke named functions and the functions invoked by a
   particular key sequence. You may also associate a new function name with an arbitrary function.

   Function: rl_command_func_t * rl_named_function (const char *name)
          Return the function with name name. name is a descriptive name users might use in a key
          binding.

   Function: rl_command_func_t * rl_function_of_keyseq (const char *keyseq, Keymap map, int *type)
          Return the function invoked by keyseq in keymap map. If map is NULL, this uses the current
          keymap. If type is not NULL, this returns the type of the object in the int variable it points
          to (one of ISFUNC, ISKMAP, or ISMACR). It takes a "translated" key sequence and should not be
          used if the key sequence can include NUL.

   Function: rl_command_func_t * rl_function_of_keyseq_len (const char *keyseq, size_t len, Keymap map,
          int *type)
          Return the function invoked by keyseq of length len in keymap map. Equivalent to
          rl_function_of_keyseq with the addition of the len parameter. It takes a "translated" key
          sequence and should be used if the key sequence can include NUL.

   Function: int rl_trim_arg_from_keyseq (const char *keyseq, size_t len, Keymap map)
          If there is a numeric argument at the beginning of keyseq, possibly including digits, return
          the index of the first character in keyseq following the numeric argument. This can be used to
          skip over the numeric argument (which is available as rl_numeric_arg) while traversing the key
          sequence that invoked the current command.

   Function: char ** rl_invoking_keyseqs (rl_command_func_t *function)
          Return an array of strings representing the key sequences used to invoke function in the
          current keymap.

   Function: char ** rl_invoking_keyseqs_in_map (rl_command_func_t *function, Keymap map)
          Return an array of strings representing the key sequences used to invoke function in the
          keymap map.

   Function: void rl_print_keybinding (const char *name, Keymap map, int readable)
          Print key sequences bound to Readline function name name in keymap map. If map is NULL, this
          uses the current keymap. If readable is non-zero, the list is formatted in such a way that it
          can be made part of an inputrc file and re-read to recreate the key binding.

   Function: void rl_function_dumper (int readable)
          Print the Readline function names and the key sequences currently bound to them to
          rl_outstream. If readable is non-zero, the list is formatted in such a way that it can be made
          part of an inputrc file and re-read.

   Function: void rl_list_funmap_names (void)
          Print the names of all bindable Readline functions to rl_outstream.

   Function: const char ** rl_funmap_names (void)
          Return a NULL terminated array of known function names. The array is sorted. The array itself
          is allocated, but not the strings inside. You should free the array, but not the pointers,
          using free or rl_free when you are done.

   Function: int rl_add_funmap_entry (const char *name, rl_command_func_t *function)
          Add name to the list of bindable Readline command names, and make function the function to be
          called when name is invoked. This returns the index of the newly-added name in the array of
          function names.

2.4.5 Allowing Undoing
   Supporting the undo command is a painless thing, and makes your functions much more useful. It is
   certainly easier to try something if you know you can undo it.

   If your function simply inserts text once, or deletes text once, and uses rl_insert_text() or
   rl_delete_text() to do it, then Readline does the undoing for you automatically.

   If you do multiple insertions or multiple deletions, or any combination of these operations, you
   should group them together into one operation. This is done with rl_begin_undo_group() and
   rl_end_undo_group().

   The types of events Readline can undo are:
enum undo_code { UNDO_DELETE, UNDO_INSERT, UNDO_BEGIN, UNDO_END };

   Notice that UNDO_DELETE means to insert some text, and UNDO_INSERT means to delete some text. That
   is, the undo code tells what to undo, not how to undo it. UNDO_BEGIN and UNDO_END are tags added by
   rl_begin_undo_group() and rl_end_undo_group(); they are how Readline delimits groups of commands that
   should be undone together.

   Function: int rl_begin_undo_group (void)
          Begins saving undo information in a group construct. The undo information usually comes from
          calls to rl_insert_text() and rl_delete_text(), but could be the result of calls to
          rl_add_undo().

   Function: int rl_end_undo_group (void)
          Closes the current undo group started with rl_begin_undo_group(). There should be one call to
          rl_end_undo_group() for each call to rl_begin_undo_group().

   Function: void rl_add_undo (enum undo_code what, int start, int end, char *text)
          Remember how to undo an event (according to what). The affected text runs from start to end,
          and encompasses text.

   Function: void rl_free_undo_list (void)
          Free the existing undo list.

   Function: int rl_do_undo (void)
          Undo the first thing on the undo list. Returns 0 if there was nothing to undo, non-zero if
          something was undone.

   Finally, if you neither insert nor delete text, but directly modify the existing text (e.g., change
   its case), call rl_modifying() once, just before you modify the text. You must supply the indices of
   the text range that you are going to modify. Readline will create an undo group for you.

   Function: int rl_modifying (int start, int end)
          Tell Readline to save the text between start and end as a single undo unit. It is assumed that
          you will subsequently modify that text.

2.4.6 Redisplay
   Function: void rl_redisplay (void)
          Change what´s displayed on the screen to reflect the current contents of rl_line_buffer.

   Function: int rl_forced_update_display (void)
          Force the line to be updated and redisplayed, whether or not Readline thinks the screen
          display is correct.

   Function: int rl_on_new_line (void)
          Tell the update functions that we have moved onto a new (empty) line, usually after outputting
          a newline.

   Function: int rl_on_new_line_with_prompt (void)
          Tell the update functions that we have moved onto a new line, with rl_prompt already
          displayed. This could be used by applications that want to output the prompt string
          themselves, but still need Readline to know the prompt string length for redisplay. It should
          be used after setting rl_already_prompted.

   Function: int rl_clear_visible_line (void)
          Clear the screen lines corresponding to the current line´s contents.

   Function: int rl_reset_line_state (void)
          Reset the display state to a clean state and redisplay the current line starting on a new
          line.

   Function: int rl_crlf (void)
          Move the cursor to the start of the next screen line.

   Function: int rl_show_char (int c)
          Display character c on rl_outstream. If Readline has not been set to display meta characters
          directly, this will convert meta characters to a meta-prefixed key sequence. This is intended
          for use by applications which wish to do their own redisplay.

   Function: int rl_message (const char *, ...)
          The arguments are a format string as would be supplied to printf, possibly containing
          conversion specifications such as '%d', and any additional arguments necessary to satisfy the
          conversion specifications. The resulting string is displayed in the echo area. The echo area
          is also used to display numeric arguments and search strings. You should call rl_save_prompt
          to save the prompt information before calling this function.

   Function: int rl_clear_message (void)
          Clear the message in the echo area. If the prompt was saved with a call to rl_save_prompt
          before the last call to rl_message, you must call rl_restore_prompt before calling this
          function.

   Function: void rl_save_prompt (void)
          Save the local Readline prompt display state in preparation for displaying a new message in
          the message area with rl_message().

   Function: void rl_restore_prompt (void)
          Restore the local Readline prompt display state saved by the most recent call to
          rl_save_prompt. If you called rl_save_prompt to save the prompt before a call to rl_message,
          you should call this function before the corresponding call to rl_clear_message.

   Function: int rl_expand_prompt (char *prompt)
          Expand any special character sequences in prompt and set up the local Readline prompt
          redisplay variables. This function is called by readline(). It may also be called to expand
          the primary prompt if the application uses the rl_on_new_line_with_prompt() function or
          rl_already_prompted variable. It returns the number of visible characters on the last line of
          the (possibly multi-line) prompt. Applications may indicate that the prompt contains
          characters that take up no physical screen space when displayed by bracketing a sequence of
          such characters with the special markers RL_PROMPT_START_IGNORE and RL_PROMPT_END_IGNORE
          (declared in readline.h as '\001' and '\002', respectively). This may be used to embed
          terminal-specific escape sequences in prompts. If you don´t use these indicators, redisplay
          will likely produce screen contents that don´t match the line buffer.

   Function: int rl_set_prompt (const char *prompt)
          Make Readline use prompt for subsequent redisplay. This calls rl_expand_prompt() to expand the
          prompt and sets rl_prompt to the result.

2.4.7 Modifying Text
   Function: int rl_insert_text (const char *text)
          Insert text into the line at the current cursor position. Returns the number of characters
          inserted.

   Function: int rl_delete_text (int start, int end)
          Delete the text between start and end in the current line. Returns the number of characters
          deleted.

   Function: char * rl_copy_text (int start, int end)
          Return a copy of the text between start and end in the current line.

   Function: int rl_kill_text (int start, int end)
          Copy the text between start and end in the current line to the kill ring, appending or
          prepending to the last kill if the last command was a kill command. This deletes the text from
          the line. If start is less than end, the text is appended, otherwise it is prepended. If the
          last command was not a kill, this uses a new kill ring slot.

   Function: void rl_replace_line (const char *text, int clear_undo)
          Replace the contents of rl_line_buffer with text. This preserves the point and mark, if
          possible. If clear_undo is non-zero, this clears the undo list associated with the current
          line.

   Function: int rl_push_macro_input (char *macro)
          Insert macro into the line, as if it had been invoked by a key bound to a macro. Not
          especially useful; use rl_insert_text() instead.

2.4.8 Character Input
   Function: int rl_read_key (void)
          Return the next character available from Readline´s current input stream. This handles input
          inserted into the input stream via rl_pending_input (see Readline Variables) and
          rl_stuff_char(), macros, and characters read from the keyboard. While waiting for input, this
          function will call any function assigned to the rl_event_hook variable.

   Function: int rl_getc (FILE *stream)
          Return the next character available from stream, which is assumed to be the keyboard.

   Function: int rl_stuff_char (int c)
          Insert c into the Readline input stream. It will be "read" before Readline attempts to read
          characters from the terminal with rl_read_key(). Applications can push back up to 512
          characters. rl_stuff_char returns 1 if the character was successfully inserted; 0 otherwise.

   Function: int rl_execute_next (int c)
          Make c be the next command to be executed when rl_read_key() is called. This sets
          rl_pending_input.

   Function: int rl_clear_pending_input (void)
          Unset rl_pending_input, effectively negating the effect of any previous call to
          rl_execute_next(). This works only if the pending input has not already been read with
          rl_read_key().

   Function: int rl_set_keyboard_input_timeout (int u)
          While waiting for keyboard input in rl_read_key(), Readline will wait for u microseconds for
          input before calling any function assigned to rl_event_hook. u must be greater than or equal
          to zero (a zero-length timeout is equivalent to a poll). The default waiting period is
          one-tenth of a second. Returns the old timeout value.

   Function: int rl_set_timeout (unsigned int secs, unsigned int usecs)
          Set a timeout for subsequent calls to readline(). If Readline does not read a complete line,
          or the number of characters specified by rl_num_chars_to_read, before the duration specified
          by secs (in seconds) and usecs (microseconds), it returns and sets RL_STATE_TIMEOUT in
          rl_readline_state. Passing 0 for secs and usecs cancels any previously set timeout; the
          convenience macro rl_clear_timeout() is shorthand for this. Returns 0 if the timeout is set
          successfully.

   Function: int rl_timeout_remaining (unsigned int *secs, unsigned int *usecs)
          Return the number of seconds and microseconds remaining in the current timeout duration in
          *secs and *usecs, respectively. Both *secs and *usecs must be non-NULL to return any values.
          The return value is -1 on error or when there is no timeout set, 0 when the timeout has
          expired (leaving *secs and *usecs unchanged), and 1 if the timeout has not expired. If either
          of secs and usecs is NULL, the return value indicates whether the timeout has expired.

2.4.9 Terminal Management
   Function: void rl_prep_terminal (int meta_flag)
          Modify the terminal settings for Readline´s use, so readline() can read a single character at
          a time from the keyboard and perform redisplay. The meta_flag argument should be non-zero if
          Readline should read eight-bit input.

   Function: void rl_deprep_terminal (void)
          Undo the effects of rl_prep_terminal(), leaving the terminal in the state in which it was
          before the most recent call to rl_prep_terminal().

   Function: void rl_tty_set_default_bindings (Keymap kmap)
          Read the operating system´s terminal editing characters (as would be displayed by stty) to
          their Readline equivalents. The bindings are performed in kmap.

   Function: void rl_tty_unset_default_bindings (Keymap kmap)
          Reset the bindings manipulated by rl_tty_set_default_bindings so that the terminal editing
          characters are bound to rl_insert. The bindings are performed in kmap.

   Function: int rl_tty_set_echoing (int value)
          Set Readline´s idea of whether or not it is echoing output to its output stream
          (rl_outstream). If value is 0, Readline does not display output to rl_outstream; any other
          value enables output. The initial value is set when Readline initializes the terminal
          settings. This function returns the previous value.

   Function: int rl_reset_terminal (const char *terminal_name)
          Reinitialize Readline´s idea of the terminal settings using terminal_name as the terminal type
          (e.g., xterm). If terminal_name is NULL, Readline uses the value of the TERM environment
          variable.

2.4.10 Utility Functions
   Function: int rl_save_state (struct readline_state *sp)
          Save a snapshot of Readline´s internal state to sp. The contents of the readline_state
          structure are documented in readline.h. The caller is responsible for allocating the
          structure.

   Function: int rl_restore_state (struct readline_state *sp)
          Restore Readline´s internal state to that stored in sp, which must have been saved by a call
          to rl_save_state. The contents of the readline_state structure are documented in readline.h.
          The caller is responsible for freeing the structure.

   Function: void rl_free (void *mem)
          Deallocate the memory pointed to by mem. mem must have been allocated by malloc.

   Function: void rl_extend_line_buffer (int len)
          Ensure that rl_line_buffer has enough space to hold len characters, reallocating it if
          necessary.

   Function: int rl_initialize (void)
          Initialize or re-initialize Readline´s internal state. It´s not strictly necessary to call
          this; readline() calls it before reading any input.

   Function: int rl_ding (void)
          Ring the terminal bell, obeying the setting of bell-style.

   Function: int rl_alphabetic (int c)
          Return 1 if c is an alphabetic character.

   Function: void rl_display_match_list (char **matches, int len, int max)
          A convenience function for displaying a list of strings in columnar format on Readline´s
          output stream. matches is the list of strings, in argv format, such as a list of completion
          matches. len is the number of strings in matches, and max is the length of the longest string
          in matches. This function uses the setting of print-completions-horizontally to select how the
          matches are displayed (see Readline Init File Syntax). When displaying completions, this
          function sets the number of columns used for display to the value of completion-display-width,
          the value of the environment variable COLUMNS, or the screen width, in that order.

   The following are implemented as macros, defined in chardefs.h. Applications should refrain from
   using them.

   Function: int _rl_uppercase_p (int c)
          Return 1 if c is an uppercase alphabetic character.

   Function: int _rl_lowercase_p (int c)
          Return 1 if c is a lowercase alphabetic character.

   Function: int _rl_digit_p (int c)
          Return 1 if c is a numeric character.

   Function: int _rl_to_upper (int c)
          If c is a lowercase alphabetic character, return the corresponding uppercase character.

   Function: int _rl_to_lower (int c)
          If c is an uppercase alphabetic character, return the corresponding lowercase character.

   Function: int _rl_digit_value (int c)
          If c is a number, return the value it represents.

2.4.11 Miscellaneous Functions
   Function: int rl_macro_bind (const char *keyseq, const char *macro, Keymap map)
          Bind the key sequence keyseq to invoke the macro macro. The binding is performed in map. When
          keyseq is invoked, the macro will be inserted into the line. This function is deprecated; use
          rl_generic_bind instead.

   Function: void rl_macro_dumper (int readable)
          Print the key sequences bound to macros and their values, using the current keymap, to
          rl_outstream. If the application has assigned a value to rl_macro_display_hook,
          rl_macro_dumper calls it instead of printing anything. If readable is greater than zero, the
          list is formatted in such a way that it can be made part of an inputrc file and re-read.

   Function: int rl_variable_bind (const char *variable, const char *value)
          Make the Readline variable variable have value. This behaves as if the Readline command 'set
          variable value' had been executed in an inputrc file (see Readline Init File Syntax) or
          by rl_parse_and_bind.

   Function: char * rl_variable_value (const char *variable)
          Return a string representing the value of the Readline variable variable. For boolean
          variables, this string is either 'on' or 'off'.

   Function: void rl_variable_dumper (int readable)
          Print the Readline variable names and their current values to rl_outstream. If readable is
          non-zero, the list is formatted in such a way that it can be made part of an inputrc file and
          re-read.

   Function: int rl_set_paren_blink_timeout (int u)
          Set the time interval (in microseconds) that Readline waits when showing a balancing character
          when blink-matching-paren has been enabled.

   Function: char * rl_get_termcap (const char *cap)
          Retrieve the string value of the termcap capability cap. Readline fetches the termcap entry
          for the current terminal name and uses those capabilities to move around the screen line and
          perform other terminal-specific operations, like erasing a line. Readline does not fetch or
          use all of a terminal´s capabilities, and this function will return values for only those
          capabilities Readline fetches.

   Function: void rl_reparse_colors (void)
          Read or re-read color definitions from LS_COLORS.

   Function: void rl_clear_history (void)
          Clear the history list by deleting all of the entries, in the same manner as the History
          library´s clear_history() function. This differs from clear_history because it frees private
          data Readline saves in the history list.

   Function: void rl_activate_mark (void)
          Enable an active region. When this is enabled, the text between point and mark (the region) is
          displayed using the color specified by the value of the active-region-start-color variable (a
          face). The default face is the terminal´s standout mode. This is called by various Readline
          functions that set the mark and insert text, and is available for applications to call.

   Function: void rl_deactivate_mark (void)
          Turn off the active region.

   Function: void rl_keep_mark_active (void)
          Indicate that the mark should remain active when the current Readline function completes and
          after redisplay occurs. In most cases, the mark remains active for only the duration of a
          single bindable Readline function.

   Function: int rl_mark_active_p (void)
          Return a non-zero value if the mark is currently active; zero otherwise.

2.4.12 Alternate Interface
   For applications that need more granular control than plain readline() provides, there is an
   alternate interface. Some applications need to interleave keyboard I/O with file, device, or window
   system I/O, typically by using a main loop to select() on various file descriptors. To accommodate
   this use case, Readline can also be invoked as a 'callback' function from an event loop. There are
   functions available to make this easy.

   Function: void rl_callback_handler_install (const char *prompt, rl_vcpfunc_t *line_handler)
          Set up the terminal for Readline I/O and display the initial expanded value of prompt. Save
          the value of line_handler to use as a handler function to call when a complete line of input
          has been entered. The handler function receives the text of the line as an argument. As with
          readline(), the handler function should free the line when it it finished with it.

   Function: void rl_callback_read_char (void)
          Whenever an application determines that keyboard input is available, it should call
          rl_callback_read_char(), which will read the next character from the current input source. If
          that character completes the line, rl_callback_read_char will invoke the line_handler function
          installed by rl_callback_handler_install to process the line. Before calling the line_handler
          function, Readline resets the terminal settings to the values they had before calling
          rl_callback_handler_install. If the line_handler function returns, and the line handler
          remains installed, Readline modifies the terminal settings for its use again. EOF is indicated
          by calling line_handler with a NULL line.

   Function: void rl_callback_sigcleanup (void)
          Clean up any internal state the callback interface uses to maintain state between calls to
          rl_callback_read_char (e.g., the state of any active incremental searches). This is intended
          to be used by applications that wish to perform their own signal handling; Readline´s internal
          signal handler calls this when appropriate.

   Function: void rl_callback_handler_remove (void)
          Restore the terminal to its initial state and remove the line handler. You may call this
          function from within a callback as well as independently. If the line_handler installed by
          rl_callback_handler_install does not exit the program, your program should call either this
          function or the function referred to by the value of rl_deprep_term_function before the
          program exits to reset the terminal settings.

2.4.13 A Readline Example
   Here is a function which changes lowercase characters to their uppercase equivalents, and uppercase
   characters to lowercase. If this function was bound to 'M-c', then typing 'M-c' would change the case
   of the character under point. Typing 'M-1 0 M-c' would change the case of the following 10
   characters, leaving the cursor on the last character changed.
/* Invert the case of the COUNT following characters. */
int invert_case_line (count, key)
	 int count, key;
{
	int start, end, i;

	start = rl_point;

	if (rl_point >= rl_end)
		return (0);

	/* Find the end of the range to modify. */
	end = start + count;

	/* Force it to be within range. */
	if (end > rl_end)
		end = rl_end;
	else if (end < 0)
		end = 0;

	if (start == end)
		return (0);

	/* For positive arguments, put point after the last changed character. For
		 negative arguments, put point before the last changed character. */
	rl_point = end;

	/* Swap start and end if we are moving backwards */
	if (start > end)
		{
			int temp = start;
			start = end;
			end = temp;
		}

	/* Tell readline that we are modifying the line,
		 so it will save the undo information. */
	rl_modifying (start, end);

	for (i = start; i != end; i++)
		{
			if (_rl_uppercase_p (rl_line_buffer))
				rl_line_buffer);
			else if (_rl_lowercase_p (rl_line_buffer))
				rl_line_buffer);
		}

	return (0);
}

2.4.14 Alternate Interface Example
   Here is a complete program that illustrates Readline´s alternate interface. It reads lines from the
   terminal and displays them, providing the standard history and TAB completion functions. It
   understands the EOF character or "exit" to exit the program.
/* Standard include files. stdio.h is required. */
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <unistd.h>

/* Used for select(2) */
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/select.h>

#include <signal.h>

#include <errno.h>
#include <stdio.h>

#include <locale.h>

/* Standard readline include files. */
#include <readline/readline.h>
#include <readline/history.h>

#if !defined (errno)
extern int errno;
#endif

static void cb_linehandler (char *);
static void sighandler (int);

int running;
int sigwinch_received;
const char *prompt = "rltest$ ";

/* Handle SIGWINCH and window size changes when readline is not active and
   reading a character. */
static void sighandler (int sig) {
	sigwinch_received = 1;
}

/* Callback function called for each line when accept-line executed, EOF
   seen, or EOF character read.  This sets a flag and returns; it could
   also call exit(3). */
static void cb_linehandler (char *line) {
	/* Can use ^D (stty eof) or `exit' to exit. */
	if (line == NULL || strcmp (line, "exit") == 0)
		{
			if (line == 0)
				printf ("\n");
			printf ("exit\n");
			/* This function needs to be called to reset the terminal settings,
				 and calling it from the line handler keeps one extra prompt from
				 being displayed. */
			rl_callback_handler_remove ();

			running = 0;
		}
	else
		{
			if (*line)
				add_history (line);
			printf ("input line: %s\n", line);
			free (line);
		}
}

int main (int c, char **v) {
	fd_set fds;
	int r;

	/* Set the default locale values according to environment variables. */
	setlocale (LC_ALL, "");

	/* Handle window size changes when readline is not active and reading
		 characters. */
	signal (SIGWINCH, sighandler);

	/* Install the line handler. */
	rl_callback_handler_install (prompt, cb_linehandler);

	/* Enter a simple event loop.  This waits until something is available
		 to read on readline´s input stream (defaults to standard input) and
		 calls the builtin character read callback to read it.  It does not
		 have to modify the user´s terminal settings. */
	running = 1;
	while (running)
		{
			FD_ZERO (&fds);
			FD_SET (fileno (rl_instream), &fds);

			r = select (FD_SETSIZE, &fds, NULL, NULL, NULL);
			if (r < 0 && errno != EINTR)
				{
					perror ("rltest: select");
					rl_callback_handler_remove ();
					break;
				}
			if (sigwinch_received)
				{
					rl_resize_terminal ();
					sigwinch_received = 0;
				}
			if (r < 0)
				continue;

			if (FD_ISSET (fileno (rl_instream), &fds))
				rl_callback_read_char ();
		}

	printf ("rltest: Event loop has exited\n");
	return 0;
}

2.5 Readline Signal Handling
   Signals are asynchronous events sent to a process by the Unix kernel, sometimes on behalf of another
   process. They are intended to indicate exceptional events, like a user pressing the terminal´s
   interrupt key, or a network connection being broken. There is a class of signals that can be sent to
   the process currently reading input from the keyboard. Since Readline changes the terminal attributes
   when it is called, it needs to perform special processing when such a signal is received in order to
   restore the terminal to a sane state, or provide applications using Readline with functions to do so
   manually.

   Readline contains an internal signal handler that is installed for a number of signals (SIGINT,
   SIGQUIT, SIGTERM, SIGHUP, SIGALRM, SIGTSTP, SIGTTIN, and SIGTTOU). When Readline receives one of
   these signals, the signal handler will reset the terminal attributes to those that were in effect
   before readline() was called, reset the signal handling to what it was before readline() was called,
   and resend the signal to the calling application. If and when the calling application´s signal
   handler returns, Readline will reinitialize the terminal and continue to accept input. When a SIGINT
   is received, the Readline signal handler performs some additional work, which will cause any
   partially-entered line to be aborted (see the description of rl_free_line_state() below).

   There is an additional Readline signal handler, for SIGWINCH, which the kernel sends to a process
   whenever the terminal´s size changes (for example, if a user resizes an xterm). The Readline SIGWINCH
   handler updates Readline´s internal screen size information, and then calls any SIGWINCH signal
   handler the calling application has installed. Readline calls the application´s SIGWINCH signal
   handler without resetting the terminal to its original state. If the application´s signal handler
   does more than update its idea of the terminal size and return (for example, a longjmp back to a main
   processing loop), it must call rl_cleanup_after_signal() (described below), to restore the terminal
   state.

   When an application is using the callback interface (see Alternate Interface), Readline installs
   signal handlers only for the duration of the call to rl_callback_read_char. Applications using the
   callback interface should be prepared to clean up Readline´s state if they wish to handle the signal
   before the line handler completes and restores the terminal state.

   If an application using the callback interface wishes to have Readline install its signal handlers at
   the time the application calls rl_callback_handler_install and remove them only when a complete line
   of input has been read, it should set the rl_persistent_signal_handlers variable to a non-zero value.
   This allows an application to defer all of the handling of the signals Readline catches to Readline.
   Applications should use this variable with care; it can result in Readline catching signals and not
   acting on them (or allowing the application to react to them) until the application calls
   rl_callback_read_char. This can result in an application becoming less responsive to keyboard signals
   like SIGINT. If an application does not want or need to perform any signal handling, or does not need
   to do any processing between calls to rl_callback_read_char, setting this variable may be
   appropriate.

   Readline provides two variables that allow application writers to control whether or not it will
   catch certain signals and act on them when they are received. It is important that applications
   change the values of these variables only when calling readline(), not in a signal handler, so
   Readline´s internal signal state is not corrupted.

   Variable: int rl_catch_signals
          If this variable is non-zero, Readline will install signal handlers for SIGINT, SIGQUIT,
          SIGTERM, SIGHUP, SIGALRM, SIGTSTP, SIGTTIN, and SIGTTOU.

          The default value of rl_catch_signals is 1.

   Variable: int rl_catch_sigwinch
          If this variable is set to a non-zero value, Readline will install a signal handler for
          SIGWINCH.

          The default value of rl_catch_sigwinch is 1.

   Variable: int rl_persistent_signal_handlers
          If an application using the callback interface wishes Readline´s signal handlers to be
          installed and active during the set of calls to rl_callback_read_char that constitutes an
          entire single line, it should set this variable to a non-zero value.

          The default value of rl_persistent_signal_handlers is 0.

   Variable: int rl_change_environment
          If this variable is set to a non-zero value, and Readline is handling SIGWINCH, Readline will
          modify the LINES and COLUMNS environment variables upon receipt of a SIGWINCH.

          The default value of rl_change_environment is 1.

   If an application does not wish to have Readline catch any signals, or to handle signals other than
   those Readline catches (SIGHUP, for example), Readline provides convenience functions to do the
   necessary terminal and internal state cleanup upon receipt of a signal.

   Function: int rl_pending_signal (void)
          Return the signal number of the most recent signal Readline received but has not yet handled,
          or 0 if there is no pending signal.

   Function: void rl_cleanup_after_signal (void)
          This function will reset the state of the terminal to what it was before readline() was
          called, and remove the Readline signal handlers for all signals, depending on the values of
          rl_catch_signals and rl_catch_sigwinch.

   Function: void rl_free_line_state (void)
          This will free any partial state associated with the current input line (undo information, any
          partial history entry, any partially-entered keyboard macro, and any partially-entered numeric
          argument). This should be called before rl_cleanup_after_signal(). The Readline signal handler
          for SIGINT calls this to abort the current input line.

   Function: void rl_reset_after_signal (void)
          This will reinitialize the terminal and reinstall any Readline signal handlers, depending on
          the values of rl_catch_signals and rl_catch_sigwinch.

   If an application wants to force Readline to handle any signals that have arrived while it has been
   executing, rl_check_signals() will call Readline´s internal signal handler if there are any pending
   signals. This is primarily intended for those applications that use a custom rl_getc_function (see
   Readline Variables) and wish to handle signals received while waiting for input.

   Function: void rl_check_signals (void)
          If there are any pending signals, call Readline´s internal signal handling functions to
          process them. rl_pending_signal() can be used independently to determine whether or not there
          are any pending signals.

   If an application does not wish Readline to catch SIGWINCH, it may call rl_resize_terminal() or
   rl_set_screen_size() to force Readline to update its idea of the terminal size when it receives a
   SIGWINCH.

   Function: void rl_echo_signal_char (int sig)
          If an application wishes to install its own signal handlers, but still have Readline display
          characters that generate signals, calling this function with sig set to SIGINT, SIGQUIT, or
          SIGTSTP will display the character generating that signal.

   Function: void rl_resize_terminal (void)
          Update Readline´s internal screen size by reading values from the kernel.

   Function: void rl_set_screen_size (int rows, int cols)
          Set Readline´s idea of the terminal size to rows rows and cols columns. If either rows or
          columns is less than or equal to 0, Readline doesn´t change that terminal dimension. This is
          intended to tell Readline the physical dimensions of the terminal, and is used internally to
          calculate the maximum number of characters that may appear on a single line and on the screen.

   If an application does not want to install a SIGWINCH handler, but is still interested in the screen
   dimensions, it may query Readline´s idea of the screen size.

   Function: void rl_get_screen_size (int *rows, int *cols)
          Return Readline´s idea of the terminal´s size in the variables pointed to by the arguments.

   Function: void rl_reset_screen_size (void)
          Cause Readline to reobtain the screen size and recalculate its dimensions.

   The following functions install and remove Readline´s signal handlers.

   Function: int rl_set_signals (void)
          Install Readline´s signal handler for SIGINT, SIGQUIT, SIGTERM, SIGHUP, SIGALRM, SIGTSTP,
          SIGTTIN, SIGTTOU, and SIGWINCH, depending on the values of rl_catch_signals and
          rl_catch_sigwinch.

   Function: int rl_clear_signals (void)
          Remove all of the Readline signal handlers installed by rl_set_signals().

2.6 Custom Completers
   Typically, a program that reads commands from the user has a way of disambiguating commands and data.
   If your program is one of these, then it can provide completion for commands, data, or both. The
   following sections describe how your program and Readline cooperate to provide this service.
     * How Completing Works
     * Completion Functions
     * Completion Variables
     * A Short Completion Example

2.6.1 How Completing Works
   In order to complete some text, the full list of possible completions must be available. That is, it
   is not possible to accurately expand a partial word without knowing all of the possible words which
   make sense in that context. The Readline library provides the user interface to completion, and two
   of the most common completion functions: filename and username. For completing other types of text,
   you must write your own completion function. This section describes exactly what such functions must
   do, and provides an example.

   There are three major functions used to perform completion:
    1. The user-interface function rl_complete(). This function is called with the same arguments as
       other bindable Readline functions: count and invoking_key. It isolates the word to be completed
       and calls rl_completion_matches() to generate a list of possible completions. It then either
       lists the possible completions, inserts the possible completions, or actually performs the
       completion, depending on which behavior is desired.
    2. The internal function rl_completion_matches() uses an application-supplied generator function to
       generate the list of possible matches, and then returns the array of these matches. The caller
       should place the address of its generator function in rl_completion_entry_function.
    3. The generator function is called repeatedly from rl_completion_matches(), returning a string each
       time. The arguments to the generator function are text and state. text is the partial word to be
       completed. state is zero the first time the function is called, allowing the generator to perform
       any necessary initialization, and a positive integer for each subsequent call. The generator
       function returns (char *)NULL to inform rl_completion_matches() that there are no more
       possibilities left. Usually the generator function computes the list of possible completions when
       state is zero, and returns them one at a time on subsequent calls. Each string the generator
       function returns as a match must be allocated with malloc(); Readline frees the strings when it
       has finished with them. Such a generator function is referred to as an application-specific
       completion function.

   Function: int rl_complete (int ignore, int invoking_key)
          Complete the word at or before point. You have supplied the function that does the initial
          simple matching selection algorithm (see rl_completion_matches()). The default is to do
          filename completion.

   Variable: rl_compentry_func_t * rl_completion_entry_function
          This is a pointer to the generator function for rl_completion_matches(). If the value of
          rl_completion_entry_function is NULL then Readline uses the default filename generator
          function, rl_filename_completion_function(). An application-specific completion function is a
          function whose address is assigned to rl_completion_entry_function and whose return values are
          used to generate possible completions.

2.6.2 Completion Functions
   Here is the complete list of callable completion functions present in Readline.

   Function: int rl_complete_internal (int what_to_do)
          Complete the word at or before point. what_to_do says what to do with the completion. A value
          of '?' means list the possible completions. 'TAB' means do standard completion. '*' means
          insert all of the possible completions. '!' means to display all of the possible completions,
          if there is more than one, as well as performing partial completion. '@' is similar to '!',
          but does not list possible completions if the possible completions share a common prefix.

   Function: int rl_complete (int ignore, int invoking_key)
          Complete the word at or before point. You have supplied the function that does the initial
          simple matching selection algorithm (see rl_completion_matches() and
          rl_completion_entry_function). The default is to do filename completion. This calls
          rl_complete_internal() with an argument depending on invoking_key.

   Function: int rl_possible_completions (int count, int invoking_key)
          List the possible completions. See description of rl_complete(). This calls
          rl_complete_internal() with an argument of '?'.

   Function: int rl_insert_completions (int count, int invoking_key)
          Insert the list of possible completions into the line, deleting the partially-completed word.
          See description of rl_complete(). This calls rl_complete_internal() with an argument of '*'.

   Function: int rl_completion_mode (rl_command_func_t *cfunc)
          Returns the appropriate value to pass to rl_complete_internal() depending on whether cfunc was
          called twice in succession and the values of the show-all-if-ambiguous and
          show-all-if-unmodified variables. Application-specific completion functions may use this
          function to present the same interface as rl_complete().

   Function: char ** rl_completion_matches (const char *text, rl_compentry_func_t *entry_func)
          Returns an array of strings which is a list of completions for text. If there are no
          completions, returns NULL. The first entry in the returned array is the substitution for text.
          The remaining entries are the possible completions. The array is terminated with a NULL
          pointer.

          entry_func is a function of two args, and returns a char *. The first argument is text. The
          second is a state argument; it is zero on the first call, and non-zero on subsequent calls.
          entry_func returns a NULL pointer to the caller when there are no more matches.

   Function: char * rl_filename_completion_function (const char *text, int state)
          A generator function for filename completion in the general case. text is a partial filename.
          The Bash source is a useful reference for writing application-specific completion functions
          (the Bash completion functions call this and other Readline functions).

   Function: char * rl_username_completion_function (const char *text, int state)
          A completion generator for usernames. text contains a partial username preceded by a random
          character (usually '~'). As with all completion generators, state is zero on the first call
          and non-zero for subsequent calls.

2.6.3 Completion Variables
   Variable: rl_compentry_func_t * rl_completion_entry_function
          A pointer to the generator function for rl_completion_matches(). NULL means to use
          rl_filename_completion_function(), the default filename completer.

   Variable: rl_completion_func_t * rl_attempted_completion_function
          A pointer to an alternative function to create matches. The function is called with text,
          start, and end. start and end are indices in rl_line_buffer defining the boundaries of text,
          which is a character string. If this function exists and returns NULL, or if this variable is
          set to NULL, then rl_complete() will call the value of rl_completion_entry_function to
          generate matches, otherwise completion will use the array of strings this function returns. If
          this function sets the rl_attempted_completion_over variable to a non-zero value, Readline
          will not perform its default completion even if this function returns no matches.

   Variable: rl_quote_func_t * rl_filename_quoting_function
          A pointer to a function that will quote a filename in an application-specific fashion.
          Readline calls this function during filename completion if one of the characters in
          rl_filename_quote_characters appears in a completed filename. The function is called with
          text, match_type, and quote_pointer. The text is the filename to be quoted. The match_type is
          either SINGLE_MATCH, if there is only one completion match, or MULT_MATCH. Some functions use
          this to decide whether or not to insert a closing quote character. The quote_pointer is a
          pointer to any opening quote character the user typed. Some functions choose to reset this
          character if they decide to quote the filename in a different style. It´s preferable to
          preserve the user´s quoting as much as possible - it´s less disruptive.

   Variable: rl_dequote_func_t * rl_filename_dequoting_function
          A pointer to a function that will remove application-specific quoting characters from a
          filename before attempting completion, so those characters do not interfere with matching the
          text against names in the filesystem. It is called with text, the text of the word to be
          dequoted, and quote_char, which is the quoting character that delimits the filename (usually
          ''' or '"'). If quote_char is zero, the filename was not in a quoted string.

   Variable: rl_linebuf_func_t * rl_char_is_quoted_p
          A pointer to a function to call that determines whether or not a specific character in the
          line buffer is quoted, according to whatever quoting mechanism the application uses. The
          function is called with two arguments: text, the text of the line, and index, the index of the
          character in the line. It is used to decide whether a character found in
          rl_completer_word_break_characters should be used to break words for the completer.

   Variable: rl_compignore_func_t * rl_ignore_some_completions_function
          Readline calls this function, if defined, when filename completion is done, after all the
          matching names have been generated. It is passed a NULL terminated array of matches. The first
          element (matches) is the maximal substring common to all matches. This function can
          re-arrange the list of matches as required, but must free each element it deletes from the
          array.

   Variable: rl_icppfunc_t * rl_directory_completion_hook
          This function, if defined, is allowed to modify the directory portion of filenames during
          completion. It could be used to expand symbolic links or shell variables in pathnames. It is
          called with the address of a string (the current directory name) as an argument, and may
          modify that string. If the function replaces the string with a new string, it should free the
          old value. Any modified directory name should have a trailing slash. The modified value will
          be used as part of the completion, replacing the directory portion of the pathname the user
          typed. At the least, even if no other expansion is performed, this function should remove any
          quote characters from the directory name, because its result will be passed directly to
          opendir().

          The directory completion hook returns an integer that should be non-zero if the function
          modifies its directory argument. The function should not modify the directory argument if it
          returns 0.

   Variable: rl_icppfunc_t * rl_directory_rewrite_hook;
          If non-zero, this is the address of a function to call when completing a directory name. This
          function takes the address of the directory name to be modified as an argument. Unlike
          rl_directory_completion_hook, it only modifies the directory name used in opendir(), not what
          Readline displays when it prints or inserts the possible completions. Readline calls this
          before rl_directory_completion_hook. At the least, even if no other expansion is performed,
          this function should remove any quote characters from the directory name, because its result
          will be passed directly to opendir().

          The directory rewrite hook returns an integer that should be non-zero if the function modifies
          its directory argument. The function should not modify the directory argument if it returns 0.

   Variable: rl_icppfunc_t * rl_filename_stat_hook
          If non-zero, this is the address of a function for the completer to call before deciding which
          character to append to a completed name. This function modifies its filename name argument,
          and Readline passes the modified value to stat() to determine the file´s type and
          characteristics. This function does not need to remove quote characters from the filename.

          The stat hook returns an integer that should be non-zero if the function modifies its
          directory argument. The function should not modify the directory argument if it returns 0.

   Variable: rl_dequote_func_t * rl_filename_rewrite_hook
          If non-zero, this is the address of a function for Readline to call when reading directory
          entries from the filesystem for completion and comparing them to the filename portion of the
          partial word being completed. It modifies the filesystem entries, as opposed to
          rl_completion_rewrite_hook, which modifies the word being completed. The function takes two
          arguments: fname, the filename to be converted, and fnlen, its length in bytes. It must either
          return its first argument (if no conversion takes place) or the converted filename in
          newly-allocated memory. The function should perform any necessary application or
          system-specific conversion on the filename, such as converting between character sets or
          converting from a filesystem format to a character input format. Readline compares the
          converted form against the word to be completed, and, if it matches, adds it to the list of
          matches. Readline will free the allocated string.

   Variable: rl_dequote_func_t * rl_completion_rewrite_hook
          If non-zero, this is the address of a function for Readline to call before comparing the
          filename portion of a word to be completed with directory entries from the filesystem. It
          modifies the word being completed, as opposed to rl_filename_rewrite_hook, which modifies
          filesystem entries. The function takes two arguments: fname, the word to be converted, after
          any rl_filename_dequoting_function has been applied, and fnlen, its length in bytes. It must
          either return its first argument (if no conversion takes place) or the converted filename in
          newly-allocated memory. The function should perform any necessary application or
          system-specific conversion on the filename, such as converting between character sets or
          converting from a character input format to some other format. Readline compares the converted
          form against directory entries, after their potential modification by
          rl_filename_rewrite_hook, and adds any matches to the list of matches. Readline will free the
          allocated string.

   Variable: rl_compdisp_func_t * rl_completion_display_matches_hook
          If non-zero, then this is the address of a function to call when completing a word would
          normally display the list of possible matches. Readline calls this function instead of
          displaying the list itself. It takes three arguments: (char **matches, int num_matches, int
          max_length) where matches is the array of matching strings, num_matches is the number of
          strings in that array, and max_length is the length of the longest string in that array.
          Readline provides a convenience function, rl_display_match_list, that takes care of doing the
          display to Readline´s output stream. You may call that function from this hook.

   Variable: const char * rl_basic_word_break_characters
          The basic list of characters that signal a break between words for the completer routine. The
          default value of this variable is the characters which break words for completion in
          Bash: "\t\n\"\\'`@$><=;|&{(".

   Variable: const char * rl_basic_quote_characters
          A list of quote characters which can cause a word break. The default value includes single and
          double quotes.

   Variable: const char * rl_completer_word_break_characters
          The list of characters that signal a break between words for rl_complete_internal(). These
          characters determine how Readline decides what to complete. The default list is the value of
          rl_basic_word_break_characters.

   Variable: rl_cpvfunc_t * rl_completion_word_break_hook
          If non-zero, this is the address of a function to call when Readline is deciding where to
          separate words for word completion. It should return a character string like
          rl_completer_word_break_characters to be used to perform the current completion. The function
          may choose to set rl_completer_word_break_characters itself. If the function returns NULL,
          Readline uses rl_completer_word_break_characters.

   Variable: const char * rl_completer_quote_characters
          A list of characters which can be used to quote a substring of the line. Completion occurs on
          the entire substring, and within the substring, rl_completer_word_break_characters are treated
          as any other character, unless they also appear within this list.

   Variable: const char * rl_filename_quote_characters
          A list of characters that cause Readline to quote a filename when they appear in a completed
          filename. The default is the null string.

   Variable: const char * rl_special_prefixes
          The list of characters that are word break characters, but should be left in text when it is
          passed to the completion function. Programs can use this to help determine what kind of
          completing to do. For instance, Bash sets this variable to "$@" so that it can complete shell
          variables and hostnames.

   Variable: int rl_completion_query_items
          This determines the maximum number of items that possible-completions will display
          unconditionally. If there are more possible completions than this, Readline asks the user for
          confirmation before displaying them. The default value is 100. A negative value indicates that
          Readline should never ask for confirmation.

   Variable: int rl_completion_append_character
          When a single completion alternative matches at the end of the command line, Readline appends
          this character to the inserted completion text. The default is a space character (' ').
          Setting this to the null character ('\0') prevents anything being appended automatically. This
          can be changed in application-specific completion functions to provide the "most sensible word
          separator character" according to an application-specific command line syntax specification.
          It is set to the default before calling any application-specific completion function, and may
          only be changed within such a function.

   Variable: int rl_completion_suppress_append
          If non-zero, Readline will not append the rl_completion_append_character to matches at the end
          of the command line, as described above. It is set to 0 before calling any
          application-specific completion function, and may only be changed within such a function.

   Variable: int rl_completion_suppress_quote
          If non-zero, Readline does not append a matching quote character when performing completion on
          a quoted string. It is set to 0 before calling any application-specific completion function,
          and may only be changed within such a function.

   Variable: int rl_completion_found_quote
          When Readline is completing quoted text, it sets this variable to a non-zero value if the word
          being completed contains or is delimited by any quoting characters, including backslashes.
          This is set before calling any application-specific completion function.

   Variable: int rl_completion_quote_character
          When Readline is completing quoted text, as delimited by one of the characters in
          rl_completer_quote_characters, it sets this variable to the quoting character it found. This
          is set before calling any application-specific completion function.

   Variable: int rl_completion_mark_symlink_dirs
          If non-zero, Readline appends a slash to completed filenames that are symbolic links to
          directory names, subject to the value of the user-settable mark-directories variable. This
          variable exists so that application-specific completion functions can override the user´s
          global preference (set via the mark-symlinked-directories Readline variable) if appropriate.
          This variable is set to the user´s preference before calling any application-specific
          completion function, so unless that function modifies the value, Readline will honor the
          user´s preferences.

   Variable: int rl_ignore_completion_duplicates
          If non-zero, then Readline removes duplicates in the set of possible completions. The default
          is 1.

   Variable: int rl_filename_completion_desired
          A non-zero value means that Readline should treat the results of the matches as filenames.
          This is always zero when completion is attempted, and can only be changed within an
          application-specific completion function. If it is set to a non-zero value by such a function,
          Readline appends a slash to directory names and attempts to quote completed filenames if they
          contain any characters in rl_filename_quote_characters and rl_filename_quoting_desired is set
          to a non-zero value.

   Variable: int rl_filename_quoting_desired
          A non-zero value means that Readline should quote the results of the matches using double
          quotes (or an application-specific quoting mechanism) if the completed filename contains any
          characters in rl_filename_quote_chars. This is always non-zero when completion is attempted,
          and can only be changed within an application-specific completion function. The quoting is
          performed via a call to the function pointed to by rl_filename_quoting_function.

   Variable: int rl_full_quoting_desired
          A non-zero value means that Readline should apply filename-style quoting, including any
          application-specified quoting mechanism, to all completion matches even if it is not otherwise
          treating the matches as filenames. This is always zero when completion is attempted, and can
          only be changed within an application-specific completion function. The quoting is performed
          via a call to the function pointed to by rl_filename_quoting_function.

   Variable: int rl_attempted_completion_over
          If an application-specific completion function assigned to rl_attempted_completion_function
          sets this variable to a non-zero value, Readline will not perform its default filename
          completion even if the application´s completion function returns no matches. It should be set
          only by an application´s completion function.

   Variable: int rl_sort_completion_matches
          If an application sets this variable to 0, Readline will not sort the list of completions
          (which implies that it cannot remove any duplicate completions). The default value is 1, which
          means that Readline will sort the completions and, depending on the value of
          rl_ignore_completion_duplicates, will attempt to remove duplicate matches.

   Variable: int rl_completion_type
          Set to a character describing the type of completion Readline is currently attempting; see the
          description of rl_complete_internal() (see Completion Functions) for the list of
          characters. This is set to the appropriate value before calling any application-specific
          completion function, so these functions can present the same interface as rl_complete().

   Variable: int rl_completion_invoking_key
          Set to the final character in the key sequence that invoked one of the completion functions
          that call rl_complete_internal(). This is set to the appropriate value before calling any
          application-specific completion function.

   Variable: int rl_inhibit_completion
          If this variable is non-zero, Readline does not perform completion, even if a key binding
          indicates it should. The completion character is inserted as if it were bound to self-insert.

2.6.4 A Short Completion Example
   Here is a small application demonstrating the use of the GNU Readline library. It is called fileman,
   and the source code resides in examples/fileman.c. This sample application provides command name
   completion, line editing features, and access to the history list.
/* fileman.c -- A tiny application which demonstrates how to use the
   GNU Readline library.  This application interactively allows users
   to manipulate files and their modes. */

#ifdef HAVE_CONFIG_H
# include <config.h>
#endif

#include <sys/types.h>
#ifdef HAVE_SYS_FILE_H
# include <sys/file.h>
#endif
#include <sys/stat.h>

#ifdef HAVE_UNISTD_H
# include <unistd.h>
#endif

#include <fcntl.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <errno.h>
#include <locale.h>

#if defined (HAVE_STRING_H)
# include <string.h>
#else /* !HAVE_STRING_H */
# include <strings.h>
#endif /* !HAVE_STRING_H */

#ifdef HAVE_STDLIB_H
# include <stdlib.h>
#endif

#include <time.h>

#include <readline/readline.h>
#include <readline/history.h>

extern char *xmalloc PARAMS((size_t));

/* The names of functions that actually do the manipulation. */
int com_list PARAMS((char *));
int com_view PARAMS((char *));
int com_rename PARAMS((char *));
int com_stat PARAMS((char *));
int com_pwd PARAMS((char *));
int com_delete PARAMS((char *));
int com_help PARAMS((char *));
int com_cd PARAMS((char *));
int com_quit PARAMS((char *));

/* A structure which contains information on the commands this program
   can understand. */

typedef struct {
	char *name;                   /* User printable name of the function. */
	rl_icpfunc_t *func;           /* Function to call to do the job. */
	char *doc;                    /* Documentation for this function.  */
} COMMAND;

COMMAND commands[] = {
	{ "cd", com_cd, "Change to directory DIR" },
	{ "delete", com_delete, "Delete FILE" },
	{ "help", com_help, "Display this text" },
	{ "?", com_help, "Synonym for `help'" },
	{ "list", com_list, "List files in DIR" },
	{ "ls", com_list, "Synonym for `list'" },
	{ "pwd", com_pwd, "Print the current working directory" },
	{ "quit", com_quit, "Quit using Fileman" },
	{ "rename", com_rename, "Rename FILE to NEWNAME" },
	{ "stat", com_stat, "Print out statistics on FILE" },
	{ "view", com_view, "View the contents of FILE" },
	{ (char *)NULL, (rl_icpfunc_t *)NULL, (char *)NULL }
};

/* Forward declarations. */
char *stripwhite (char *);
COMMAND *find_command (char *);

/* The name of this program, as taken from argv. */
char *progname;

/* When non-zero, this global means the user is done using this program. */
int done;

char *dupstr (char *s) {
	char *r;

	r = xmalloc (strlen (s) + 1);
	strcpy (r, s);
	return (r);
}

int main (int argc, char **argv) {
	char *line, *s;

	setlocale (LC_ALL, "");

	progname = argv;

	initialize_readline ();       /* Bind our completer. */

	/* Loop reading and executing lines until the user quits. */
	for ( ; done == 0; )
		{
			line = readline ("FileMan: ");

			if (!line)
				break;

			/* Remove leading and trailing whitespace from the line.
				 Then, if there is anything left, add it to the history list
				 and execute it. */
			s = stripwhite (line);

			if (*s)
				{
					add_history (s);
					execute_line (s);
				}

			free (line);
		}
	exit (0);
}

/* Execute a command line. */
int execute_line (char *line) {
	register int i;
	COMMAND *command;
	char *word;

	/* Isolate the command word. */
	i = 0;
	while (line))
		i++;
	word = line + i;

	while (line))
		i++;

	if (line)
		line = '\0';

	command = find_command (word);

	if (!command)
		{
			fprintf (stderr, "%s: No such command for FileMan.\n", word);
			return (-1);
		}

	/* Get argument to command, if any. */
	while (whitespace (line))
		i++;

	word = line + i;

	/* Call the function. */
	return ((*(command->func)) (word));
}

/* Look up NAME as the name of a command, and return a pointer to that
   command.  Return a NULL pointer if NAME isn´t a command name. */
COMMAND *find_command (char *name) {
	register int i;

	for (i = 0; commands.name; i++)
		if (strcmp (name, commands.name) == 0)
			return (&commands);

	return ((COMMAND *)NULL);
}

/* Strip whitespace from the start and end of STRING.  Return a pointer
   into STRING. */
char *stripwhite (char *string) {
	register char *s, *t;

	for (s = string; whitespace (*s); s++)
		;

	if (*s == 0)
		return (s);

	t = s + strlen (s) - 1;
	while (t > s && whitespace (*t))
		t--;
	*++t = '\0';

	return s;
}

/* **************************************************************** */
/*                                                                  */
/*                  Interface to Readline Completion                */
/*                                                                  */
/* **************************************************************** */

char *command_generator (const char *, int);
char **fileman_completion (const char *, int, int);

/* Tell the GNU Readline library how to complete.  We want to try to complete
   on command names if this is the first word in the line, or on filenames
   if not. */
void initialize_readline (void) {
	/* Allow conditional parsing of the ~/.inputrc file. */
	rl_readline_name = "FileMan";

	/* Tell the completer that we want a crack first. */
	rl_attempted_completion_function = fileman_completion;
}

/* Attempt to complete on the contents of TEXT.  START and END bound the
   region of rl_line_buffer that contains the word to complete.  TEXT is
   the word to complete.  We can use the entire contents of rl_line_buffer
   in case we want to do some simple parsing.  Return the array of matches,
   or NULL if there aren´t any. */
char **fileman_completion (const char *text, int start, int end) {
	char **matches;

	matches = (char **)NULL;

	/* If this word is at the start of the line, then it is a command
		 to complete.  Otherwise it is the name of a file in the current
		 directory. */
	if (start == 0)
		matches = rl_completion_matches (text, command_generator);

	return (matches);
}

/* Generator function for command completion.  STATE lets us know whether
   to start from scratch; without any state (i.e. STATE == 0), then we
   start at the top of the list. */
char *command_generator (const char *text, int state) {
	static int list_index, len;
	char *name;

	/* If this is a new word to complete, initialize now.  This includes
		 saving the length of TEXT for efficiency, and initializing the index
		 variable to 0. */
	if (!state)
		{
			list_index = 0;
			len = strlen (text);
		}

	/* Return the next name which partially matches from the command list. */
	while (name = commands.name)
		{
			list_index++;

			if (strncmp (name, text, len) == 0)
				return (dupstr(name));
		}

	/* If no names matched, then return NULL. */
	return ((char *)NULL);
}

/* **************************************************************** */
/*                                                                  */
/*                       FileMan Commands                           */
/*                                                                  */
/* **************************************************************** */

/* String to pass to system ().  This is for the LIST, VIEW and RENAME
   commands. */
static char syscom;

/* List the file(s) named in arg. */
int com_list (char *arg) {
	if (!arg)
		arg = "";

	snprintf (syscom, sizeof (syscom), "ls -FClg %s", arg);
	return (system (syscom));
}

int com_view (char *arg) {
	if (!valid_argument ("view", arg))
		return 1;

#if defined (__MSDOS__)
	/* more.com doesn´t grok slashes in pathnames */
	snprintf (syscom, sizeof (syscom), "less %s", arg);
#else
	snprintf (syscom, sizeof (syscom), "more %s", arg);
#endif
	return (system (syscom));
}

int com_rename (char *arg) {
	too_dangerous ("rename");
	return (1);
}

int com_stat (char *arg) {
	struct stat finfo;

	if (!valid_argument ("stat", arg))
		return (1);

	if (stat (arg, &finfo) == -1)
		{
			perror (arg);
			return (1);
		}

	printf ("Statistics for `%s':\n", arg);

	printf ("%s has %d link%s, and is %d byte%s in length.\n",
					arg,
					finfo.st_nlink,
					(finfo.st_nlink == 1) ? "" : "s",
					finfo.st_size,
					(finfo.st_size == 1) ? "" : "s");
	printf ("Inode Last Change at: %s", ctime (&finfo.st_ctime));
	printf ("      Last access at: %s", ctime (&finfo.st_atime));
	printf ("    Last modified at: %s", ctime (&finfo.st_mtime));
	return (0);
}

int com_delete (char *arg) {
	too_dangerous ("delete");
	return (1);
}

/* Print out help for ARG, or for all of the commands if ARG is
   not present. */
int com_help (char *arg) {
	register int i;
	int printed = 0;

	for (i = 0; commands.name; i++)
		{
			if (!*arg || (strcmp (arg, commands.name) == 0))
				{
					printf ("%s\t\t%s.\n", commands.doc);
					printed++;
				}
		}

	if (!printed)
		{
			printf ("No commands match `%s'.  Possibilities are:\n", arg);

			for (i = 0; commands.name; i++)
				{
					/* Print in six columns. */
					if (printed == 6)
						{
							printed = 0;
							printf ("\n");
						}

					printf ("%s\t", commands.name);
					printed++;
				}

			if (printed)
				printf ("\n");
		}
	return (0);
}

/* Change to the directory ARG. */
int com_cd (char *arg) {
	if (chdir (arg) == -1)
		{
			perror (arg);
			return 1;
		}

	com_pwd ("");
	return (0);
}

/* Print out the current working directory. */
int com_pwd (char *ignore) {
	char dir, *s;

	s = getcwd (dir, sizeof(dir) - 1);
	if (s == 0)
		{
			printf ("Error getting pwd: %s\n", dir);
			return 1;
		}

	printf ("Current directory is %s\n", dir);
	return 0;
}

/* The user wishes to quit using this program.  Just set DONE non-zero. */
int com_quit (char *arg) {
	done = 1;
	return (0);
}

/* Function which tells you that you can´t do this. */
void too_dangerous (char *caller) {
	fprintf (stderr,
			 "%s: Too dangerous for me to distribute.  Write it yourself.\n",
			 caller);
}

/* Return non-zero if ARG is a valid argument for CALLER, else print
   an error message and return zero. */
int valid_argument (char *caller, char *arg) {
	if (!arg || !*arg)
		{
			fprintf (stderr, "%s: Argument required.\n", caller);
			return (0);
		}

	return (1);
}

Appendix A GNU Free Documentation License
Version 1.3, 3 November 2008
Copyright © 2000, 2001, 2002, 2007, 2008 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
http://fsf.org/

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.

    0. PREAMBLE
       The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other functional and useful
       document free in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone the effective freedom to copy and
       redistribute it, with or without modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially.
       Secondarily, this License preserves for the author and publisher a way to get credit for their
       work, while not being considered responsible for modifications made by others.
       This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative works of the document must
       themselves be free in the same sense. It complements the GNU General Public License, which is a
       copyleft license designed for free software.
       We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free software, because free
       software needs free documentation: a free program should come with manuals providing the same
       freedoms that the software does. But this License is not limited to software manuals; it can be
       used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or whether it is published as a printed
       book. We recommend this License principally for works whose purpose is instruction or reference.
    1. APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS
       This License applies to any manual or other work, in any medium, that contains a notice placed by
       the copyright holder saying it can be distributed under the terms of this License. Such a notice
       grants a world-wide, royalty-free license, unlimited in duration, to use that work under the
       conditions stated herein. The "Document", below, refers to any such manual or work. Any member of
       the public is a licensee, and is addressed as "you". You accept the license if you copy, modify
       or distribute the work in a way requiring permission under copyright law.
       A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the Document or a portion of it,
       either copied verbatim, or with modifications and/or translated into another language.
       A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section of the Document that deals
       exclusively with the relationship of the publishers or authors of the Document to the Document´s
       overall subject (or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly within that
       overall subject. (Thus, if the Document is in part a textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section
       may not explain any mathematics.) The relationship could be a matter of historical connection
       with the subject or with related matters, or of legal, commercial, philosophical, ethical or
       political position regarding them.
       The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles are designated, as being
       those of Invariant Sections, in the notice that says that the Document is released under this
       License. If a section does not fit the above definition of Secondary then it is not allowed to be
       designated as Invariant. The Document may contain zero Invariant Sections. If the Document does
       not identify any Invariant Sections then there are none.
       The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are listed, as Front-Cover Texts or
       Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that the Document is released under this License. A
       Front-Cover Text may be at most 5 words, and a Back-Cover Text may be at most 25 words.
       A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy, represented in a format whose
       specification is available to the general public, that is suitable for revising the document
       straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed of pixels) generic paint
       programs or (for drawings) some widely available drawing editor, and that is suitable for input
       to text formatters or for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input to
       text formatters. A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file format whose markup, or absence of
       markup, has been arranged to thwart or discourage subsequent modification by readers is not
       Transparent. An image format is not Transparent if used for any substantial amount of text. A
       copy that is not "Transparent" is called "Opaque".
       Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain ASCII without markup, Texinfo
       input format, LaTeX input format, SGML or XML using a publicly available DTD, and
       standard-conforming simple HTML, PostScript or PDF designed for human modification. Examples of
       transparent image formats include PNG, XCF and JPG. Opaque formats include proprietary formats
       that can be read and edited only by proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which the DTD
       and/or processing tools are not generally available, and the machine-generated HTML, PostScript
       or PDF produced by some word processors for output purposes only.
       The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself, plus such following pages as
       are needed to hold, legibly, the material this License requires to appear in the title page. For
       works in formats which do not have any title page as such, "Title Page" means the text near the
       most prominent appearance of the work´s title, preceding the beginning of the body of the text.
       The "publisher" means any person or entity that distributes copies of the Document to the public.
       A section "Entitled XYZ" means a named subunit of the Document whose title either is precisely
       XYZ or contains XYZ in parentheses following text that translates XYZ in another language. (Here
       XYZ stands for a specific section name mentioned below, such as "Acknowledgements",
       "Dedications", "Endorsements", or "History".) To "Preserve the Title" of such a section when you
       modify the Document means that it remains a section "Entitled XYZ" according to this definition.
       The Document may include Warranty Disclaimers next to the notice which states that this License
       applies to the Document. These Warranty Disclaimers are considered to be included by reference in
       this License, but only as regards disclaiming warranties: any other implication that these
       Warranty Disclaimers may have is void and has no effect on the meaning of this License.
    2. VERBATIM COPYING
       You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either commercially or noncommercially,
       provided that this License, the copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License
       applies to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you add no other conditions
       whatsoever to those of this License. You may not use technical measures to obstruct or control
       the reading or further copying of the copies you make or distribute. However, you may accept
       compensation in exchange for copies. If you distribute a large enough number of copies you must
       also follow the conditions in section 3.
       You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and you may publicly display
       copies.
    3. COPYING IN QUANTITY
       If you publish printed copies (or copies in media that commonly have printed covers) of the
       Document, numbering more than 100, and the Document´s license notice requires Cover Texts, you
       must enclose the copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover Texts:
       Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on the back cover. Both covers must
       also clearly and legibly identify you as the publisher of these copies. The front cover must
       present the full title with all words of the title equally prominent and visible. You may add
       other material on the covers in addition. Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as
       they preserve the title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated as verbatim
       copying in other respects.
       If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit legibly, you should put the
       first ones listed (as many as fit reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto
       adjacent pages.
       If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering more than 100, you must
       either include a machine-readable Transparent copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in or
       with each Opaque copy a computer-network location from which the general network-using public has
       access to download using public-standard network protocols a complete Transparent copy of the
       Document, free of added material. If you use the latter option, you must take reasonably prudent
       steps, when you begin distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this Transparent
       copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location until at least one year after the last
       time you distribute an Opaque copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that edition
       to the public.
       It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the Document well before
       redistributing any large number of copies, to give them a chance to provide you with an updated
       version of the Document.
    4. MODIFICATIONS
       You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under the conditions of sections 2
       and 3 above, provided that you release the Modified Version under precisely this License, with
       the Modified Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution and
       modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy of it. In addition, you must do
       these things in the Modified Version:
         A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct from that of the
            Document, and from those of previous versions (which should, if there were any, be listed in
            the History section of the Document). You may use the same title as a previous version if
            the original publisher of that version gives permission.
         B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities responsible for
            authorship of the modifications in the Modified Version, together with at least five of the
            principal authors of the Document (all of its principal authors, if it has fewer than five),
            unless they release you from this requirement.
         C. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the Modified Version, as the publisher.
         D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
         E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent to the other copyright
            notices.
         F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice giving the public
            permission to use the Modified Version under the terms of this License, in the form shown in
            the Addendum below.
         G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections and required Cover
            Texts given in the Document´s license notice.
         H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.
         I. Preserve the section Entitled "History", Preserve its Title, and add to it an item stating
            at least the title, year, new authors, and publisher of the Modified Version as given on the
            Title Page. If there is no section Entitled "History" in the Document, create one stating
            the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document as given on its Title Page, then add
            an item describing the Modified Version as stated in the previous sentence.
         J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for public access to a
            Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the network locations given in the Document
            for previous versions it was based on. These may be placed in the "History" section. You may
            omit a network location for a work that was published at least four years before the
            Document itself, or if the original publisher of the version it refers to gives permission.
         K. For any section Entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications", Preserve the Title of the
            section, and preserve in the section all the substance and tone of each of the contributor
            acknowledgements and/or dedications given therein.
         L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered in their text and in their
            titles. Section numbers or the equivalent are not considered part of the section titles.
         M. Delete any section Entitled "Endorsements". Such a section may not be included in the
            Modified Version.
         N. Do not retitle any existing section to be Entitled "Endorsements" or to conflict in title
            with any Invariant Section.
         O. Preserve any Warranty Disclaimers.
       If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or appendices that qualify as
       Secondary Sections and contain no material copied from the Document, you may at your option
       designate some or all of these sections as invariant. To do this, add their titles to the list of
       Invariant Sections in the Modified Version´s license notice. These titles must be distinct from
       any other section titles.
       You may add a section Entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains nothing but endorsements of
       your Modified Version by various parties-for example, statements of peer review or that the text
       has been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of a standard.
       You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a passage of up to 25 words
       as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list of Cover Texts in the Modified Version. Only one
       passage of Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or through arrangements
       made by) any one entity. If the Document already includes a cover text for the same cover,
       previously added by you or by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of,
       you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on explicit permission from the
       previous publisher that added the old one.
       The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License give permission to use
       their names for publicity for or to assert or imply endorsement of any Modified Version.
    5. COMBINING DOCUMENTS
       You may combine the Document with other documents released under this License, under the terms
       defined in section 4 above for modified versions, provided that you include in the combination
       all of the Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified, and list them all as
       Invariant Sections of your combined work in its license notice, and that you preserve all their
       Warranty Disclaimers.
       The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and multiple identical Invariant
       Sections may be replaced with a single copy. If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the
       same name but different contents, make the title of each such section unique by adding at the end
       of it, in parentheses, the name of the original author or publisher of that section if known, or
       else a unique number. Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of Invariant
       Sections in the license notice of the combined work.
       In the combination, you must combine any sections Entitled "History" in the various original
       documents, forming one section Entitled "History"; likewise combine any sections Entitled
       "Acknowledgements", and any sections Entitled "Dedications". You must delete all sections
       Entitled "Endorsements."
    6. COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS
       You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents released under this
       License, and replace the individual copies of this License in the various documents with a single
       copy that is included in the collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License for
       verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other respects.
       You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute it individually under
       this License, provided you insert a copy of this License into the extracted document, and follow
       this License in all other respects regarding verbatim copying of that document.
    7. AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS
       A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate and independent documents or
       works, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is called an "aggregate" if the
       copyright resulting from the compilation is not used to limit the legal rights of the
       compilation´s users beyond what the individual works permit. When the Document is included in an
       aggregate, this License does not apply to the other works in the aggregate which are not
       themselves derivative works of the Document.
       If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these copies of the Document, then if
       the Document is less than one half of the entire aggregate, the Document´s Cover Texts may be
       placed on covers that bracket the Document within the aggregate, or the electronic equivalent of
       covers if the Document is in electronic form. Otherwise they must appear on printed covers that
       bracket the whole aggregate.
    8. TRANSLATION
       Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may distribute translations of the
       Document under the terms of section 4. Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires
       special permission from their copyright holders, but you may include translations of some or all
       Invariant Sections in addition to the original versions of these Invariant Sections. You may
       include a translation of this License, and all the license notices in the Document, and any
       Warranty Disclaimers, provided that you also include the original English version of this License
       and the original versions of those notices and disclaimers. In case of a disagreement between the
       translation and the original version of this License or a notice or disclaimer, the original
       version will prevail.
       If a section in the Document is Entitled "Acknowledgements", "Dedications", or "History", the
       requirement (section 4) to Preserve its Title (section 1) will typically require changing the
       actual title.
    9. TERMINATION
       You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except as expressly provided
       under this License. Any attempt otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute it is void,
       and will automatically terminate your rights under this License.
       However, if you cease all violation of this License, then your license from a particular
       copyright holder is reinstated (a) provisionally, unless and until the copyright holder
       explicitly and finally terminates your license, and (b) permanently, if the copyright holder
       fails to notify you of the violation by some reasonable means prior to 60 days after the
       cessation.
       Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder is reinstated permanently if the
       copyright holder notifies you of the violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time
       you have received notice of violation of this License (for any work) from that copyright holder,
       and you cure the violation prior to 30 days after your receipt of the notice.
       Termination of your rights under this section does not terminate the licenses of parties who have
       received copies or rights from you under this License. If your rights have been terminated and
       not permanently reinstated, receipt of a copy of some or all of the same material does not give
       you any rights to use it.
   10. FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE
       The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of the GNU Free Documentation
       License from time to time. Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present version,
       but may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns. See
       http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.
       Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number. If the Document specifies
       that a particular numbered version of this License "or any later version" applies to it, you have
       the option of following the terms and conditions either of that specified version or of any later
       version that has been published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation. If the Document
       does not specify a version number of this License, you may choose any version ever published (not
       as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation. If the Document specifies that a proxy can decide
       which future versions of this License can be used, that proxy´s public statement of acceptance of
       a version permanently authorizes you to choose that version for the Document.
   11. RELICENSING
       "Massive Multiauthor Collaboration Site" (or "MMC Site") means any World Wide Web server that
       publishes copyrightable works and also provides prominent facilities for anybody to edit those
       works. A public wiki that anybody can edit is an example of such a server. A "Massive Multiauthor
       Collaboration" (or "MMC") contained in the site means any set of copyrightable works thus
       published on the MMC site.
       "CC-BY-SA" means the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 license published by Creative
       Commons Corporation, a not-for-profit corporation with a principal place of business in San
       Francisco, California, as well as future copyleft versions of that license published by that same
       organization.
       "Incorporate" means to publish or republish a Document, in whole or in part, as part of another
       Document.
       An MMC is "eligible for relicensing" if it is licensed under this License, and if all works that
       were first published under this License somewhere other than this MMC, and subsequently
       incorporated in whole or in part into the MMC, (1) had no cover texts or invariant sections, and
       (2) were thus incorporated prior to November 1, 2008.
       The operator of an MMC Site may republish an MMC contained in the site under CC-BY-SA on the same
       site at any time before August 1, 2009, provided the MMC is eligible for relicensing.

ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents

   To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of the License in the document and
   put the following copyright and license notices just after the title page:
  Copyright (C)  year  your name.
  Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
  under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
  or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
  with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover
  Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
  Free Documentation License''.

   If you have Invariant Sections, Front-Cover Texts and Back-Cover Texts, replace the "with...Texts."
   line with this:
    with the Invariant Sections being list their titles, with
    the Front-Cover Texts being list, and with the Back-Cover Texts
    being list.

   If you have Invariant Sections without Cover Texts, or some other combination of the three, merge
   those two alternatives to suit the situation.

   If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we recommend releasing these examples
   in parallel under your choice of free software license, such as the GNU General Public License, to
   permit their use in free software.


---

