filename: nasa-power-of-10-coding-rules-multif-20260223.txt
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Power_of_10:_Rules_for_Developing_Safety-Critical_Code

The Power of 10: Rules for Developing Safety-Critical Code

   The Power of 10 Rules were created in 2006 by Gerard J. Holzmann of the NASA/JPL Laboratory for Reliable
   Software. The rules are intended to eliminate certain C coding practices that make code difficult to review
   or statically analyze. These rules are a complement to the MISRA C guidelines and have been incorporated
   into the greater set of JPL coding standards.

Rules
   The ten rules are:
    1. Restrict all code to very simple control flow constructs: do not use goto statements, setjmp
       or longjmp constructs, or direct or indirect recursion.
    2. Give all loops a fixed upper bound. It must be trivially possible for a checking tool to prove
       statically that the loop cannot exceed a preset upper bound on the number of iterations. If a
       tool cannot prove the loop bound statically, the rule is considered violated.
    3. Do not use dynamic memory allocation after initialization.
    4. No function should be longer than what can be printed on a single sheet of paper in a standard
       format with one line per statement and one line per declaration. Typically, this means no more
       than about 60 lines of code per function.
    5. The code's assertions density should average to minimally two assertions per function.
       Assertions must be used to check for anomalous conditions that should never happen in real-life
       executions. Assertions must be side-effect free and should be defined as Boolean tests. When an
       assertion fails, an explicit recovery action must be taken such as returning an error condition
       to the caller of the function that executes the failing assertion. Any assertion for which a
       static checking tool can prove that it can never fail or never hold violates this rule.
    6. Declare all data objects at the smallest possible level of scope.
    7. Each calling function must check the return value of nonvoid functions, and each called function
       must check the validity of all parameters provided by the caller.
    8. The use of the preprocessor must be limited to the inclusion of header files and simple
       macros definitions. Token pasting, variable argument lists (ellipses), and recursive macro
       calls are not allowed. All macros must expand into complete syntactic units. The use of
       conditional compilation directives must be kept to a minimum.
    9. The use of pointers must be restricted. Specifically, no more than one level of dereference
       should be used. Pointer dereference operations may not be hidden in macro definitions or inside
       typedef declarations. Function pointers are not permitted.
   10. All code must be compiled, from the first day of development, with all compiler warnings enabled
       at the most pedantic setting available. All code must compile without warnings. All code must
       also be checked daily with at least one, but preferably more than one, strong static source code
       analyzer and should pass all analyses with zero warnings.

Uses
   The NASA study of the Toyota electronic throttle control firmware found at least 243 violations
   of these rules.


---
https://www.perforce.com/blog/kw/NASA-rules-for-developing-safety-critical-code

NASA's 10 Rules for Developing Safety-Critical Code
May 28, 2024

   NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory's Laboratory for Reliable Software developed a set of code guidelines
   for developing safety-critical code. The NASA's 10 rules are intended to eliminate C coding practices
   that make it difficult to review or properly analyze with static analysis tools.

What Is NASA Power of 10 Coding?
   If you want to improve the safety of your embedded systems, you could start by coding like NASA,
   whose mission-critical projects, launched in the extreme environment of outer space, require extreme
   safety controls. Strict coding standards with rigorous rules and requirements prevent errors from the
   start and keep embedded software safe.

   Since 2006, NASA has followed 10 rules they developed, which are aimed at testability, readability,
   and reliability, based on a paper by Gerard Holzmann of the NASA JPL's Laboratory for Reliable
   Software titled, "The Power of 10: Rules for Developing Safety-Critical Code."

   Coding guidelines help development teams write cleaner code and implement coding best practices, so
   that quality remains high throughout the software development lifeycle. Like many safety-critical
   guidelines, the NASA power of 10 coding rules target primarily the C programming language and help
   developers check the reliability of critical applications written in C.

NASA Power of 10: The NASA's 10 Rules
   NASA's 10 rules for developing safety-critical code are:
    1. Restrict all code to very simple control flow constructs: do not use goto statements, setjmp or
       longjmp constructs, or direct or indirect recursion.
    2. Give all loops a fixed upper bound.
    3. Do not use dynamic memory allocation after initialization.
    4. No function should be longer than what can be printed on a single sheet of paper in a standard
       format with one line per statement and one line per declaration.
    5. The code's assertion density should average to minimally two assertions per function.
    6. Declare all data objects at the smallest possible level of scope.
    7. Each calling function must check the return value of nonvoid functions, and each called function
       must check the validity of all parameters provided by the caller.
    8. The use of the preprocessor must be limited to the inclusion of header files and simple macro
       definitions.
    9. Limit pointer use to a single dereference, and do not use function pointers.
   10. Compile with all possible warnings active; all warnings should then be addressed before the
       release of the software.

How to Implement Safety-Critical Code Like NASA's 10 Rules
   The best way to ensure safety-critical code is to use a
   [https://www.perforce.com/blog/sca/what-static-analysis]static code analyzer.

   Static code analyzers enforce coding rules and flag standard violations. Klocwork comes with
   quality coding taxonomies - NASA, MISRA, and AUTOSAR - to ensure secure, reliable, and
   compliant software.

Enforce NASA Compliance with Klocwork
   Running static analysis is an important part of the process of developing safety-critical
   applications and is a tool to use when complying with functional safety standards, such as IEC
   61508 and EN 50128. Klocwork can check your code against the NASA coding practice guidelines to
   automatically flag violations and enforce its quality coding standard.

Try Klocwork for Safety-Critical Code
   See for yourself how [https://www.perforce.com/products/klocwork]Klocwork helps ensure safety-critical
   code.


---

