filename: Torvads-vs-AI-20260916.txt
https://www.makeuseof.com/linus-torvalds-just-showed-the-right-way-to-use-ai-for-coding-and-everyone-missed-it/

...

Linus Torvalds was only able to track down a bug in Linux´s Intel graphics driver after 24 debug patches and
18 kernel boots. On Torvalds´ Battlemage G21 system, the bug caused the display manager to repeatedly fail,
leaving him with a black screen. When he found the core of the fix, it came down to changing round_up() to
round_down(). It took several weeks to realize "up" should have been "down."

...

This wasn´t a case of AI grinding away and producing a fix while Torvalds relaxed and waited for the outcome.
During the process, the AI repeatedly tried to convince him to stop, even describing the problem as impossible
and unsolvable. In other words, it was effectively telling him to give up and file a bug report.

Torvalds ignored the AI´s recommendation to give up, and that is indeed the part that deserves focus. He chose
not to let the AI´s conclusion end the investigation.

...

The actual phrase that the AI used in describing the bug was "impossible and unsolvable." The AI reached that
conclusion multiple times while Torvalds remained elbow-deep in the bug. The AI wasn´t saying it had run out
of leads or that the investigation would take a lot of time; it was declaring the problem impossible and
unsolvable. These words sound final, and would, in most cases, kill any resolve to try again.

If you haven´t already, at some point you´ll probably get a version of this same response from AI. Give it a
difficult bit of code, a very messy spreadsheet formula, or let it untangle a WordPress conflict. Eventually,
you may run into the same situation where it confidently tells you that something is simply impossible.

A problem running out of solutions is not the same as a model running out of ideas. We may be prone to
treating them the same. It´s easy to treat a confident answer as evidence that the model has already
considered every reasonable possibility. This reasoning is one of the costliest habits encouraged by the rise
of commercial AI.

The difference was that Torvalds didn´t let the AI´s confidence outrank his own judgment. He wasn´t trying to
ask it in a nicer way or out-prompt it.

...

The entire lesson from this fits into one sentence: let the AI search, never let it decide. For this particular
fix, it needed an understanding of the graphics driver role to start with. This is much different from knowing
what it´s currently doing wrong. Torvalds had built this level of understanding having worked on the Linux
kernel for decades, and AI models don´t have that. They may be very detailed when describing what is happening
without necessarily knowing which part of that behavior is actually wrong.

...


