filename: howto-find-things-intro-to-binary-5pp-20260123.txt
https://drmaciver.substack.com/p/how-to-find-things-an-intro-to-binary

How to find things (an intro to binary search)
Oct 21, 2025

   As probably most of you are aware, I'm actually a software developer. I don't talk about it here
   much, as this is mostly a newsletter about the rest of my interests, but I've been experimenting
   with writing about whatever I feel like writing about, and today I feel like writing about binary
   search.

   If you're not a programmer, don't worry. Most of this should be highly accessible to you anyway.
   There will be some code later, but it's not the main point of this article. I just think it's worth
   understanding the technique either way. If you are a programmer, this will still teach you something
   new, because I think you've probably been taught binary search wrong.

   Part of why I'm thinking about binary search is that it came up in a recent issue of London
   Centric, in the context of bike theft. This isn't the first time it's come up, and it's a story that
   makes programmers (and mathematicians apparently) wince in pain when they hear it.

   Here's the problem: You leave your bike somewhere at 9AM. You come back at 5PM, and discover to your
   horror that your bike has been stolen. Fortunately, there's a CCTV camera. You go to the police and
   report the issue.

   "Sorry", they say, "that would require us to watch eight hours of CCTV footage to spot the theft.
   Bike theft just isn't a high enough priority to justify that kind of effort."

   At this point you might feel outraged, but depending on the sort of person you are your outrage might
   take a different form. On the one hand, you might be outraged that your bike has been stolen and that
   you're not getting it back. If, on the other hand, you are a Cambridge professor or otherwise
   similarly inclined, you will be outraged at what you see as a failure of basic common sense, whip
   your blackboard out of your pocket, and proceed to give the police a lecture on what you believe to
   be one of the fundamental rights of humankind: Replacing O(n) operations with O(log(n)) ones.

   Here's the idea: OK, sure. There are eight hours in which your bike could have been stolen. That's a
   lot of footage, makes sense that you don't want to watch that.

   But... you could just check the footage for 1PM. Is the bike there? If so, great. Now you know the
   crime was done between 1PM and 5PM. Otherwise, you know it was done between 9AM and 1PM. Either way,
   that's four hours of footage to watch. Still too long, but a lot less than eight!

   Let's say the bike is still there at 1PM. Now, you check whether the bike was there at 3PM. If it
   was, the crime happened between 3PM at 5PM, otherwise between 1PM and 3PM. Again, now you've only got
   two hours to check...

   You can repeat this process, each time cutting the time you have to check in half. Once you're down
   to a few minutes where you know the bike was there at the start and wasn't at the end, you just watch
   those few minutes of footage to see the crime being committed.

   This strategy is called binary search. Search meaning, well, you're looking for something, and binary
   meaning "relating to two". It's binary search because you're searching by repeatedly reducing the
   size of the space you have to search by a factor of two.

   You have to check seven times to get the time down from eight hours to under five minutes. If you
   exactly halve it each time (you probably won't, but it works basically the same way if you're close
   enough and pick nice round numbers), the amount of footage you have left is eight hours, then four
   hours, two hours, one hour, half an hour, 15 minutes, 7.5 minutes, 3.75 minutes.

   If you instead had sixteen hours of footage to check, you would require one more step, because your
   first step would cut you down from sixteen hours to eight, and then you'd need the seven more steps
   as above.

   This is what my crack about O(log(n)) operations means: The original strategy is linear - that is,
   every minute you add to the footage adds a minute to the time it takes you to process it.

   In contrast, the binary search strategy is logarithmic. Every time you double the size of the search
   space, you increase the time it takes you by some fixed amount (the amount of time it takes you to
   check a midpoint).

   For large spaces this matters a lot: If you start with eight hours, and each step takes you say 10
   seconds, then it takes you a minute and ten seconds (70 seconds) to get yourself down to three
   minutes and 45 seconds, so the whole task takes you just under five minutes, in contrast to watching
   the whole eight hours. If on the other hand you started with ten minutes of footage, your binary
   search step cuts the space in half to five minutes, then you watch five minutes, and it only saves
   you just under five minutes of time watching (you could of course cut it down further - e.g. if you
   wanted to only watch two and a half minutes of footage, this could save you a bit over 7 minutes).

   If you only had 30 seconds to watch in the first place, there'd be little point in doing any fussy
   midpoint finding

   The point of "linear" versus "logarithmic" is not that logarithmic is faster in general, it's that
   logarithmic is always going to be better for large enough problems. For small problems it might still
   be faster to use a linear operation.

   Now, if you're a programmer there are two things you should probably have noticed about the above
   explanation:
    1. It is blindingly obvious if you've encountered binary search even once.
    2. It is probably not actually an example of binary search as you've been taught it.

   The other prompt for writing this post is that I was running a calibration interview question on a
   colleague who I have a very high opinion of, and at some point he tried to write a slightly custom
   binary search to solve a problem, and got into a little bit of a mess (I think he'd have sorted it
   out fine when not under time pressure) and reverted to a linear search. I, meanwhile, was surprised,
   because I forgot that binary searches were a thing people got wrong despite myself having previously
   failed an interview by getting a binary search wrong. The reason is that in the meantime I have
   learned the correct way to think about binary search, and forgot that almost everyone teaches it
   wrong. So the next part of this post is my attempt to teach it to you right.

   In order to get a stereotypical example of how binary search is normally taught, I asked Claude.
   Here's what it said:

     Binary search is an efficient algorithm for finding a target value in a sorted array or list.

     How it works:
    1. Start by examining the middle element
    2. If the target equals the middle element, you're done
    3. If the target is less than the middle element, search the left half
    4. If the target is greater than the middle element, search the right half
    5. Repeat this process on the chosen half until you find the target or the search space is empty

   I think this is a perfectly adequate example of how binary search is normally explained, but note
   that this is very much not what we've just done in the bike theft example! We don't have a list,
   nothing is sorted, we're not looking for a specific item.

   And yet, they do seem quite similar. The reason for this is that they are the same thing, but
   Claude's (and everyone else's) explanation is only describing a single specific use of binary search
   rather than the general phenomenon, and as a result contains a lot of distracting details that make
   it harder to understand and also less useful.

   In order to see one of the key differences, let me tell you a story.

   Suppose a thief steals your bike at 12:30 PM. Riding away madly, he is suddenly struck by an
   epiphany: Stealing is wrong.

   Guiltily, he cycles back to where he found it, and puts your bike back and locks it up with the
   somehow magically still intact lock (or maybe you didn't lock it, at which point frankly this whole
   saga is on you), returning it to the bike rack at 1:30PM.

   Now, at 3PM, some other bastard steals your bike and cycles off with it. He is in no way burdened
   with a sense of conscience, and keeps it for himself.

   What happens now with our binary search?

   Well, we check at 1PM, and the bike's not there. Therefore it's stolen before 1PM. Now we check at 11
   AM, bike's there, etc. until we eventually find our bike thief at 12:30. Great! We now have a bike
   theft to prosecute.

   As binary search is normally taught, it works on sorted arrays. In this case, that would mean that
   your bike has a certain stolenness that only increases over time: It can be stolen, but once it is
   stolen it is never unstolen. As the above example shows, this method finds a theft just fine if you
   lose that property and allow for the bike to be unstolen.

   The next thing is that this is binary search over a continuous space. If you wanted to, you could run
   the binary search forever, slicing the time finer and finer. This would be dumb, so we bail out
   when we get to a small enough time to watch it ourselves, so it causes no problems, but the pure
   binary search as explained by Claude never stops here unless we get lucky and find the exact instant
   of the theft (as opposed to some point when the theft is in progress).

   Neither of these are problems if you think of binary search in the right way, and the bike theft
   example is a nice illustration of what binary search is actually doing: You have two numbers (or
   points on a line if you prefer) which might be far apart, and are different in some way. Binary
   search lets you find two numbers between them that are close together and are still different from
   each other. That is, it lets you find two nearby points where something changes, where "nearby" means
   "within five minutes of each other", and the something that changes is whether there is a bike there.

   In the sorted list example, what you're looking for is a point where the values change from less than
   your target to greater than or equal to your target, and your notion of "nearby" is "right next to
   each other". So, in code, the standard binary search looks like this (if you can't read the code,
   don't worry about it too much, I'll explain in a minute):

def find_target(elements, target):
	"""
	Given a sorted list 'elements', returns the index
	of the first position where all elements after that
	point are >= target.
	"""
	# If the first element is >= the target, all elements
	# are, so we return 0.
	if elements[0] >= target:
		return 0

	# If the last element is < the target, then no elements
	# in the array are, so we return the length meaning that
	# only an empty set of elements are >= the target
	if elements[-1] < target:
		return len(elements)

	# Invariant: elements[low] < target
	low = 0

	# Invariant: elements[high] >= target
	high = len(elements) - 1

	while low + 1 < high:
		# Take the midpoint
		mid = (lo + hi) // 2
		# Assign to whichever endpoint would preserve
		# the invariant.
		if elements[mid] < target:
			low = mid
		else:
			high = mid

	# By the invariants, elements[low] < target and
	# elements[high] >= target
	# We know that at this point low + 1 == high, so
	# that means that high is necessarily the first
	# point at which elements become >= target.
	return high

   If you're a programmer reading this, the main take home you should have from this code is that if you
   find yourself implementing binary search (which hopefully you won't too often, but sometimes you
   gotta), never under any circumstances skip writing those "Invariant" comments at the top. They will
   save you confusion every time.

   If you're not a programmer, here's what's going on in it:

   We're looking for the point where the list changes from elements that are less than the target to the
   point where they are greater than or equal to the target. We find a pair of indices next to each
   other where this changes, and thus the larger of the two is necessarily the first point (because it
   is greater than or equal to the every element before it is less than the target).

   If the target is in the list, that first point where they are greater than or equal is necessarily
   where the target is. Otherwise, you can tell the target is not in the list by looking at that index
   and checking whether it's past the end of the list or the value at it is greater than the target.

   Let's try an example to work through it: Suppose you've got the list of elements 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and
   we're looking for the number 7 in it. This proceeds as follows:
    1. We start with low = 0, high = 5 (indexes start from 0, so the first element is the element at
       position 0).
    2. We take the midpoint of this, which is 2 (division rounds down), so we look at the element at
       position 2, which is 5.
    3. This is less than 7, so we now set low = 2.
    4. Now, low = 2, high = 5, so mid = 3. The element at position 3 is 7, which is greater than or
       equal to seven, so we set high = 3.
    5. Now, low is 2, high is 3, so lo + 1 equals high, and we stop and return that the first index
       greater than or equal to 7 is at position 3 (which it is, because 7 is there).

   But honestly, if you're not a programmer, this is probably the least interesting possible example of
   binary search, this problem just comes up in programming a lot, and it's much more interesting to
   understand the general principle.

   Why is it important to understand? Well, partly just because I think knowing things like this that
   give you an easy perspective shift on what is possible is almost always valuable, and partly because
   binary search is very useful.

   We've already seen how it takes the cycle theft example from not worth it to to easy, by helping
   you figure out when something happened. Another place I've suggested in the past where understanding
   this principle is useful is estimating unknown quantities. I used the example of guessing the
   population of Paraguay. You first pick a number that's obviously too small, and a number that's
   obviously too large, and then you progressively narrow that range through binary search.

   Except, that again isn't quite the same thing! The problem there is that while you are doing the same
   thing (finding a pair of points where one is obviously too small and one is obviously too large),
   your stopping condition is no longer necessarily when the points are close. The problem is that
   there's a large range of values in the middle where your answer to "Is this obviously too large or
   obviously too small?" is "No. Seems kinda plausible but I'm not sure.", so you can get stuck on
   making progress.

   One way to solve this is with the same way we did with the ordered list: Our condition for the lower
   bound is "obviously too small", and for the upper bound is "not obviously too small". I think you'll
   still get stuck at some point when you find yourself asking "OK, but how obvious is obvious...?", but
   you'll do a lot better. You can then repeat this on the other side with "obviously too large", and
   you get a range of values that you think are plausible.

   Another way to solve this is that once your midpoint is non-obvious you can just try testing some
   other points in the range and updating your range on the basis of that. Pick randomly, or near the
   edges, or whatever, and narrow the range on that basis. There's not actually anything magical about
   the exact midpoint - any point you try between the two ends will allow you to update the range if you
   get an "obviously too small" or "obviously too large" answer.

   This sort of flexibility is one of the reasons why I think it's super helpful to understand binary
   search as looking for changes in behaviour. It makes it much easier to reason about new variants,
   because you really understand what's going on.

   And in general this is one of the key purposes of understanding how things work: If you know how to
   make it, you know how to make something like it that works slightly differently. In the pen cap
   post, I talked about how "how things work is how you work with them", and that's important, but the
   other reason to understand how things work is that how things work is how other things like them
   work, and how things work is how you make them.

   I've run into this principle over and over again in programming, software development, and
   maths. e.g. I did some algorithmic work I'm really proud of recently, and it only happened
   because I spent some time staring at the preliminary material going "Hmm... How on earth does that
   work?", in much the same way I found out about pen caps recently. Right now I'm working on some
   statistics, and I think if I treated statistics the way most people do - as a set of tools to use
   without understanding them - the task I'm doing would be almost impossible.

   I don't think this is just for abstract subjects either. I see it a lot in other people who better at
   more physical skills than me: In much the same way I can just whip up a new algorithm, they can just
   improvise or custom build a physical object where I'd have to ad hoc adapt some existing object that
   was much less fit for purpose.

   And, you know, often that's fine. It's impossible to acquire complete knowledge of everything. Some
   of the people I'm comparing myself to on the physical skills have literal decades of more experience
   in the subject, and I'm unlikely to put in the effort to acquire those. I expect that will be
   the same for most people on most of the specific things where I understand them in this way too. This
   isn't an invitation to try to learn everything, it's just me drawing your attention to what happens
   with the things you do decide to learn.

   And part of that is that when you find yourself in the position of acquiring a new technique or
   skill, I think that if you can it's worth taking the time to make sure you really understand it, and
   to find the right way of looking at it, so you can stop treating it as a narrow and well-defined
   thing you can do, and start treating it as a lesson in how to interact with the world in a
   variety of related ways.

 - There's more technical posting on my notebook blog. I used to do technical blogging at my
   "main" blog, but that's as the last post says "on indefinite hiatus".

 - There's also the possibility of you happening to get lucky and catching the criminal mid-act in one
   of your repeatedly checking points in the video.

 - In general, linear/O(n) actually means "some fixed multiple of a minute". For example if you had to
   watch the footage twice, every minute would add two minutes of time for you. If you were able to
   watch the video at 10x speed, every minute would add six seconds. Both of these are still O(n)
   operations, because every minute of footage adds a fixed amount of time to the task.

 - And, indeed, you can see that this is the case in this example! Once we get under the five minute
   mark we switch to a linear search. This is partly because of the problem - we actually want to catch
   the thief in the act - but also for viewing a continuous chunk of footage, whenever you get to under
   the time it takes you to fiddle with your video controls, it's always going to be easier and faster
   just to watch it.

 - Claude should of course not be taken as authoritative, but I think it's pretty safe to rely on it
   being clichéd.

 - Of course, it's not very useful for getting your bloody bike back, but details details.

 - Well you couldn't because the video has a fixed frame rate, and maybe there's a quantum time
   consideration even if that weren't the case, but ignore this detail.

 - Or, at least, reduced to the problem of getting the police to follow basic instructions and care
   about doing their jobs.

 - Even with binary search! As the expression goes, if I had a nickel for every time I've invented a
   novel variant of binary search, I'd have... Well, two nickels, but it's weird that it's happened twice.

 - The first is the observation that binary search gets much faster (improved complexity even!) if
   you have a good guess about where the point you're looking for is. The second is that if what you're
   actually looking for is a random sample in some ordered range, you can do binary search
   incrementally to get the desired result efficiently.

 - I don't think I'd have figured out either of these without the perspective on binary search I'm
   telling you about here.

 - The GAWRS and RAWRS variants in section H.3 of Fast Controlled Generation from Language Models
   with Adaptive Weighted Rejection Sampling if you're interested. Sadly I only did this work quite late
   in the publication, so it only made it into an appendix, but these are implemented in
   genlm-control as the main algorithm used for AWRS.


---

