filename: iq_how-do-different-iq-people-think_20230313.txt
https://www.quora.com/How-do-different-IQ-people-think-70-80-100-120-120-140-140-160-160-180-180-200-200/answer/Otakar-Salaj

How do different IQ people think (70-80, 100-120, 120-140, 140-160, 160-180, 180-200, 200+)?

For the 70 to 85 IQ range, thinking in labels and simply naming everyday objects is typical. 70 - 75 is the
range of IQ scores where people have barely just enough intelligence to understand and use a bus schedule or
a phone book. They are typically literate, but their knowledge usually doesn't extend beyond elementary school,
they are noticeably slower at reading, mental math is restricted to single digit additions and subtractions
and they are somewhat noticeably defficient in language skills. Most of those folks don't need everyday help
from a caregiver and can live an independent life, as contrasted to those in 50 to 70 IQ range or below.
Frequently, they have some, but not deeply pronounced difficulty in controlling and interpreting their emotions.

Those in 85 to 100 IQ range usually think in terms of basic logic and can handle some of the more simple
unfamiliar and new situations. Their verbal expression is generally more simple than is usual in people
slightly above the 100 mark, but they can socialise and connect to others without any difficulty directly
linked to intelligence. High school diploma is often the education level of those people, and a vast
majority of them is employed in very common and "normal" jobs (like a cook, a plumber, or, above 90, an
electrician). They can understand simple concepts, and display some very basic abstract reasoning. Their
dominant cognitive style is typically analytical thinking, or an ability to manipulate learned factual
information and applying basic deductive skills to deduce probable solutions to encountered novel situations.
Some of the most warm-hearted people I personally know have IQs in this region.

Up from 100 to 115, mental abilities start to evoke a sense of being "casually bright" while you have a
conversation with them, they are quite often formulating a personal and distinguished points of view on
everyday situations, the news, information learned at school and elsewhere. Some of those manage to get a
college degree in the "softer" subjects. Most of them don't have a typically "intellectual" hobbies or
interests, though some certainly do. With enough effort and time put in, they can grasp some quite complex
conceptual information. Dominant cognitive domain is usually verbal - linguistic and their thought processes
are generally verbalised in nature, but they can quite easily employ abstract and generalising abilities if
the circumstances require it, but it's not a cognitive style preffered by them.

115 to 130. Those people are noticeably clever, have very developed vocabularies, and display quick and
precise associative thinking patterns. They tend to think in terms of complex logical sequences, finding
similarities among just loosely connected pieces of information and they are quite capable of comming with
original and creative solutions to life's obstacles. Lower two-thirds of this standard deviation range tends
to work in management, while the upper 5, from 125 to 130, havethe greatest type and level of intelligence
for leadership positions.

130 to 145. Think of "the smartest kid in the class" at your elementary school, those are in the 130 - 135
range, and the smartest student in the class of a grammar school is usually in 135 - 140 range. At this level,
thinking in logical sequences starts getting replaced by thinking in associative patterns and more fuzzy
logic and tree structures of information. They aren't just highly adept at manipulating and applying learned
knowledge, but from this range on, synthetic thinking style and creative inferrence abilities become prominent.
They usually are top notch in their field and some of them work as professional scientists. As a college degree,
they typically choose STEM fields or informatics / cybernetics and programming. Many work as software
developers and a bit of them make living as creative writers and artists (but artistic giftedness has only a
weak connection to intelligence as measured by IQ). Those are the IQs of people commonly viewed as 
"intelligent" in the society. In test score classification, they fall under the "intellectually gifted" designation.

145 to 160. People in this range start to be perceived as being extremelly intelligent. Indeed, above 145 is
where high intelligence starts to become a problem when it comes to socialising and finding peers. They tend
to think in pattern structures, high level abstractions, and integration of synthetic and analytical thinking,
which they apply at once, exhibiting a cognitive style known as "integrated thinking". They often perceive
links in perceived information which others don't and easily perceive patterns which are hidden for a vast
majority of people. A qualitatively different type of intelligence starts to emerge at the lower boundary of
this range as those with such intellects do frequently experience and fully utilise vivid level of
perception known as synaesthesia and ideaesthesia. For me personally, I can more broadly describe my "head world",
as I fall on the lower edge of this IQ range. Since I was a kid, I knew that I am different from most others.
It was quite difficult to find peers for me to have an interesting conversation. My interests simply didn't,
and don't match most people. Having a auditory-visual, visuo-tactile and auditory-gustatory synaesthesia, I
was experiencing reality quite differently than most people I knew since I was born and I never have even
thought about the possibility that others simply don't perceive music as colors and complex geometric
patterns accompanied by a distinct flavour no my tongue and gentle sense of touch on my skin to it,
sometimes becoming quite erotic in nature when I play some of the more difficult pieces on the piano. In
elementary schooling, and then at grammar school, most classmates perceived me as exceptionally gifted and
an "intellectual", or simply a nerd. It was at the university, when I had a girlfriend and one evening when
we were together, making love, she touched me very erotically and, to her surprise, I started screaming
"GREEN BLUE VIOLED RED YELLOW GREEN AWWWWW......". She asked me just what the fuck is happening here and I
had to think for a while and elaborate on an intelligible answer. Nowadays, I do socially fit in quite well,
but only thanks to my social circles at the uni, as I'm a theoretical physics student. I have one very close
friend, whose IQ is tested at 155, a mathematician. In his words, this level of intelligence is isolating
even in the mathematics-physics circles.

160+: People with intelligence that high tend to completelly bypass classical logic as we know it in their
thoughts, and think at an outstanding level of complexity, inferring generalised conceptual structures in
their minds, while perceiving the world in fuzzy patterns and connect seemingly disconnected pieces of
information to come up with some of the most brilliant ideas which originated from mankind. They are
frequently socially excluded, as very few can understand them, and they are typically too excentric to
associate with and enjoy time together. I know two people with a 160 IQ, and both of them are kind of
"stealth extreme intelligence", as they, for I don't know what reason, sometimes behave in a way that really
seems dumb, and conversation with them is extremelly simple, only to come up with something extraordinarily
inventive and brilliant the next time I see them. Btw. Both of those 160s are extensive and intensive users
of illicit drugs of basically any kind.


---

